Series Editors:  Giuseppe Mancia · Enrico Agabiti RoseiUpdates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection
Reuven/uni00A0Zimlichman/uni00A0· Stevo/uni00A0Julius/uni00A0
Giuseppe/uni00A0Mancia    E ditors 
Prehypertension 
and 
Cardiometabolic 
Syndrome
Updates in Hypertension  
and Cardiovascular Protection
Series editors:
Giuseppe Mancia
Milan, Italy
Enrico Agabiti Rosei
Brescia, Italy
The aim of this series is to provide informative updates on both the knowledge and 
the clinical management of a disease that, if uncontrolled, can very seriously 
damage the human body and is still among the leading causes of death worldwide. 
Although hypertension is associated mainly with cardiovascular, endocrine, and 
renal disorders, it is highly relevant to a wide range of medical specialties and 
fields  – from family medicine to physiology, genetics, and pharmacology. The 
topics addressed by volumes in the series Updates in Hypertension and 
Cardiovascular Protection have been selected for their broad significance and will 
be of interest to all who are involved with this disease, whether residents, fellows, 
practitioners, or researchers.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/15049
Reuven Zimlichman • Stevo Julius 
Giuseppe Mancia
Editors
Prehypertension  
and Cardiometabolic 
Syndrome
Editors
Reuven Zimlichman
Sackler Faculty of Medicine
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv
Israel
Giuseppe Mancia
Emeritus Professor of Medicine
University of Milano-Bicocca
Milan
ItalyStevo Julius
Department of Internal Medicine
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor 
MI
USA
ISSN 2366-4606     ISSN 2366-4614 (electronic)
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection
ISBN 978-3-319-75309-6    ISBN 978-3-319-75310-2 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018956308
© Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of 
the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recita-
tion, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or infor -
mation storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar 
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publica-
tion does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the 
relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the 
editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors 
or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims 
in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerlandv
Foreword
This book aims to give information on several pathophysiological and clinical 
aspects related to the concept of prehypertension. Although the definition of prehy-
pertension in guidelines may be somewhat different, a large amount of clinical and 
epidemiological data indicates that individuals, not taking antihypertensive treat-
ment, with systolic/diastolic blood pressure slightly below 140/90 mmHg, are at 
increased risk for sustained hypertension and cardiovascular diseases. The book 
will provide an up-to-date overview on epidemiological studies supporting the high 
risk for developing not only hypertension but also organ damage. Information is 
given on the relation between prehypertension and structural and functional changes 
in the heart as well as in the large and small arteries, with evidence of increased left 
ventricular mass, arteriosclerotic changes, and remodeling of small arteries, thus 
leading to increased cardiovascular and renal events risk. Prehypertensive subjects 
often present also additional cardiovascular risk factors. The evidence from recent 
studies supports the rationale for treating prehypertensives not only with lifestyle 
modification but also with antihypertensive medications, especially those with high 
normal blood pressure and high–very high cardiovascular risk. The book will be of 
great use to all researchers and practitioners interested in the prevention and treat-
ment of hypertension, which represents a fundamental step in the reduction of the 
large cardiovascular disease burden worldwide.
 Enrico Agabiti Rosei
Department of Internal Medicine
University of Brescia 
Brescia, Italyvii
Preface
Prehypertension is identified as the blood pressure range from 120/80 to 139/89 mmHg, 
although its definition has frequently changed over the years with the changing subdi-
vision of the blood pressure spectrum from the lowest to the highest values. The impor -
tance of prehypertension for research as well as for public health has long been 
appreciated for a variety of important reasons. First, within this blood pressure range 
lays a large fraction of the population. Second, compared to lower blood pressure val-
ues, prehypertensive individuals more frequently exhibit also overweight or obesity, 
glucose intolerance, and dyslipidemias, which make prehypertension an extremely fre-
quent, if not a regular, component of the metabolic syndrome. Third, this clustering of 
risk factors makes the cardiovascular risk of prehypertension substantially higher than 
that of individuals with optimal blood pressure values, the risk being made, in many 
cases, greater by the presence of incipient or even more advanced asymptomatic dam-
age of the heart, the kidney, and the large and small arteries. Finally, prehypertension 
owes its name to the high probability of a progression of the blood pressure values to a 
frank hypertensive condition, a phenomenon so frequent as to allow, from the middle 
age on, most prehypertensives to predict for themselves a hypertensive future. All this 
makes this condition important for investigating the factors that initially cause the car -
diovascular alterations as well as the specific and interactive hemodynamic and meta-
bolic mechanisms participating in the dynamic process that leads to the progressive 
elevation of blood pressure and organ damage. It is also an especially good setting to 
test lifestyle or drug-based strategies to effectively prevent this process, with benefits 
potentially much greater than those offered by later interventions, when the damage is 
established and likely to be at least in part irreversible.
This book provides a series of chapters on the most recent pathophysiological, 
epidemiological, diagnostic, and therapeutic research in the prehypertension area, 
written by a number of well-known experts. We hope this will be of interest to both 
clinicians and investigators, the former to update their information on the status of 
evidence-based prevention and treatment strategies in this cardiovascular area and 
the latter for even more clearly focusing on the gaps in knowledge and device means 
to fill them by appropriate investigations.
Tel Aviv, Israel Reuven Zimlichman
Ann Arbor, MI, USA Stevo Julius
Milan, Italy Giuseppe Manciaix
Part I  Epidemiology and Statistics
 1  High-Normal Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents  . . . . . . . .    3
Mieczysław Litwin, Janusz Feber, and Zbigniew Kułaga
 2  History of Prehypertension: Past and Present, a Saga of 
Misunderstanding and Neglect  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
Reuven Zimlichman, Stevo Julius, and Giuseppe Mancia
 3  Parental History of Hypertension as the Determinant  
of Cardiovascular Function  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
Katarzyna Stolarz-Skrzypek and Danuta Czarnecka
 4  Prehypertension, the Risk of Hypertension and Events  . . . . . . . . . . .   37
Michael Doumas, Niki Katsiki, and Dimitri P. Mikhailidis
 5  Prehypertension and the Cardiometabolic Syndrome . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
Talma Rosenthal
 6  Prehypertension: Definition and Epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   67
Sadi Gulec and Cetin Erol
 7  Prehypertension, Statistics and Health Burden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   79
Andrzej Januszewicz and Aleksander Prejbisz
Part II  Organ Damage in Prehypertension
 8  Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases of Prehypertension  . . . . . . . . . . . .  101
Stéphane Laurent and Pedro Guimarães Cunha
 9  Central Blood Pressure and Prehypertension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  127
Charalambos Vlachopoulos, Dimitrios Terentes-Printzios,  
and Dimitrios Tousoulis
 10  Diurnal and Pulsatile Hemodynamics in Individuals 
with Prehypertension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  137
Thomas Weber, Siegfried Wassertheurer, Bernhard Hametner, 
Brigitte Kupka, and Kai MortensenContentsx
 11  Early Changes in Renal Vasculature in Prehypertension  . . . . . . . . . .  149
Hermann Haller, Anna Bertram, Klaus Stahl, and Jan Menne
 12  Heart and Prehypertension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  159
Cesare Cuspidi, Marijana Tadic, and Guido Grassi
 13  Hemodynamics of Prehypertension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  171
Peter W. de Leeuw, Barry van Varik, Daan J. L. van Twist, and 
Abraham A. Kroon
 14  Microvascular Structural Alterations and Tissue Perfusion 
in Hypertension/Diabetes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  183
Damiano Rizzoni, Carolina De Ciuceis, Enzo Porteri, Enrico 
Agabiti-Rosei, and Claudia Agabiti-Rosei
 15  Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment:  
A Forty-Year Retrospect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  197
Jonathan Owen, Stephen Morse, Angela McLean, and Efrain Reisin
 16  Pre-chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)? Is It Time  
for a New Staging?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  231
Alexander H. Kirsch and Alexander R. Rosenkranz
 17  Prehypertension and Vascular-Renal Impairment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  241
Celine Dreyfuss-Tubiana, Michel E. Safar, and Jacques Blacher
 18  Subclinical Vascular Damage in Prehypertension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  251
Enrico Agabiti-Rosei, Anna Paini, and Massimo Salvetti
 19  Systolic Hypertension in Youth  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  257
James D. H. Goodman, Ian B. Wilkinson, and Carmel M. McEniery
 20  The Role of Perivascular Fat in Raising Blood Pressure  
in Obesity and Diabetes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  271
Reza Aghamohammadzadeh and Anthony M. Heagerty
Part III  Alteration of Cardiovascular Control Systems
 21  Endothelial Dysfunction in Early Phases of Hypertension . . . . . . . . .  291
Stefano Taddei, Rosa Maria Bruno, and Stefano Masi
 22  Prehypertension and the Renin- Angiotensin- Aldosterone  
System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  307
Elena Kaschina and Thomas Unger
 23  Tachycardia in Prehypertension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  319
Paolo Palatini
 24  The Role of the Brain in Prehypertension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  341
Stevo JuliusContentsxi
 25  The Role of the Brain in Neurogenic Prehypertension  . . . . . . . . . . . .  349
Gino Seravalle, Dagmara Hering, Guido Grassi, and Krzysztof 
Narkiewicz
Part IV  Risk Assessment in Prehypertension
 26  Blood Pressure and Atherosclerosis: Subclinical Arteriosclerosis 
as an Early Sign of Organ Damage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  363
Raimund Erbel, Nils Lehmann, Andreas Stang, Sofia Churzidse, 
Susanne Moebus, and Karl-Heinz Jöckel
 27  Blood Pressure Measurement, White- Coat and Masked  
Hypertension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  383
G. Seravalle, G. Grassi, and Giuseppe Mancia
 28  Blood Pressure Variability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  395
Gianfranco Parati and Juan Eugenio Ochoa
 29  Home Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension  
and Hypertension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  419
Angeliki Ntineri, Anastasios Kollias, and George S. Stergiou
 30  Morning Surge of Blood Pressure in Prehypertension  
and Hypertension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  437
Uday M. Jadhav and Onkar C. Swami
 31  Physical Activity and Exercise Training as Important  
Modifiers of Vascular Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  451
Arno Schmidt-Trucksäss
 32  Role of Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring  
in Prehypertension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  471
Giacomo Pucci, Gianpaolo Reboldi, Fabio Angeli, Dario Turturiello, 
and Paolo Verdecchia
 33  Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor  
of Cardiovascular Risk Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  493
Arnljot Flaa, Morten Rostrup, Sverre E. Kjeldsen, and Ivar Eide
Part V  End Organ Damage in Prehypertension
 34  Early Cardiovascular Dysfunction in Prehypertension . . . . . . . . . . . .  529
Ana Jelaković, Živka Dika, Vesna Herceg-Čavrak, Mario Laganović, 
Dragan Lović, and Bojan JelakovićContentsxii
Part VI  Clinical Studies in Prehypertension
 35  Neurogenic Mechanisms in Prehypertension and Pharmacologic 
Approaches to the Prevention and Treatment of Hypertension: 
Highlights of Professor Stevo Julius’ Scientific Contributions . . . . . .  553
Brent M. Egan
 36  The PREVER Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  571
Sandra Costa Fuchs and Flávio Danni Fuchs
Part VII  Management of Prehypertension
 37  Antihypertensive Drugs and Vascular Health  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  585
Alan C. Cameron, Giacomo Rossitto, Ninian N. Lang,  
and Rhian M. Touyz
 38  Management of Prehypertension and Hypertension in Women 
of Childbearing Age  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  607
Agnieszka Olszanecka and Danuta Czarnecka
 39  Non-pharmacologic Approaches for the Management  
of Prehypertension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  629
Reuven Zimlichman
 40  Prehypertension: A Case in Favor of Early Use of Diuretics  . . . . . . .  643
Flávio Danni Fuchs and Sandra Costa Fuchs
 41  Prehypertension in the Era of Personalized Medicine in 2017 . . . . . .  657
Pavel Hamet, Mounsif Haloui, and Johanne Tremblay
 42  Treatment of High-Normal Blood Pressure in the Guidelines  . . . . . .  677
Jana Brguljan and Giuseppe AmbrosioContentsPart I
Epidemiology and Statistics3 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_1
M. Litwin ( *) 
Department of Nephrology and Arterial Hypertension,  
The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: M.Litwin@IPCZD.PL 
J. Feber 
Department of Pediatric Nephrology, The Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario,  
Ottawa, ON, Canada 
Z. Kułaga 
Department of Public Health, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland1High-Normal Blood Pressure in Children 
and Adolescents
Mieczysław Litwin, Janusz Feber, and Zbigniew Kułaga
1.1  Introduction
Elevated blood pressure (BP) is regarded as the most important, but reversible risk 
factor for the development of cardiovascular (CV) disease. Epidemiological studies 
based on data from prospective decade-long observations of cohorts of adults pro-
vided strong evidence that systolic blood pressure (SBP) above 140 mmHg signifi-
cantly increased the risk of CV disease and CV events such as stroke, coronary heart 
disease, heart failure and chronic kidney disease (CKD). However, the chosen 
threshold of SBP of 140 mmHg may be artificial, as there is a linear relationship 
between SBP and CV disease, i.e. the risk of CV disease is increased even at BP 
levels lower than 140 mmHg. In fact, subjects with SBP above 120 mmHg but still 
below 140 mmHg had a higher probability of developing arterial hypertension than 
those with an SBP below 120 mmHg. Although the problems related to CV risk and 
BP within the high-normal/prehypertensive range is quite well described regarding 
adults, only recent paediatric studies shed some light on the risk of high-normal/
prehypertensive BP in children and adolescents. The aim of this review is to discuss 
the significant impact of even a mild increase of BP within the high-normal range 
concerning the development of CV disease and other hypertensive-related compli-
cations in children and adolescents.4
1.2  Idea of Prehypertension
The association between systolic and diastolic BP and the development of CV dis-
ease and CV events in adults is continuous and graded. This concept is based on 
10 years of observational data, which has shown that adults with high-normal BP 
had significantly greater cumulative incidence of CV events and CV disease than 
those with normal and optimal BP values. This cumulative incidence of CV disease 
increased with age and was particularly high among older subjects [1]. As already 
noted in earlier reports from the Framingham study, adults with BP in a high-normal 
range had a characteristic intermediary phenotype when compared to those with 
normal and optimal BP, namely a steady increase in body mass index (BMI), serum 
cholesterol and age, from an optimal to a high-normal BP range [1]. Further reports 
also showed that adults with high-normal BP suffer from autonomic dysfunction, 
visceral obesity and higher uric acid and metabolic abnormalities, typical of meta-
bolic syndrome (MS) [2].
Thus, the threshold of 140/90  mmHg defining arterial hypertension in adults 
means that the CV risk is significantly greater for those with BP above 140/90, as 
compared to those with BP below this threshold. However, young adults with BP 
values in the high-normal range of 130–139/85–89 mmHg also had a greater inci-
dence of arterial hypertension than their peers with lower/normal BP values. These 
findings indicate that high-normal BP status is an early and transitory stage of 
hypertensive disease, before the development of sustained arterial hypertension. 
The idea of a progressive increase of BP from normal through high-normal to 
hypertensive values is similar to the contemporary view of development of type 2 
diabetes from a prediabetic state to fully blown diabetes. As the process of transition 
from pre-disease to disease state is potentially reversible, the detection and/or treat-
ment of high-normal BP in the early stages may prevent CV complications at a later 
stage. This notion has led to the concept of “prehypertension” and its use in the 
classification of BP status in adults [3], implying that prehypertension should be 
treated as the first stage of hypertension. While this may apply for adults, the situa-
tion in children is more complicated due to different BP classifications (based on 
percentiles or Z-scores rather than absolute BP values) and relatively few longitudi-
nal population data on CV risk associated with BP levels [4].
1.3  Classification of Blood Pressure Status in Children 
and Adolescents: Definition of High-Normal Blood 
Pressure/Prehypertension in Children and Adolescents
In contrast to classification of BP status in adults, the definition of arterial hyperten-
sion in children and adolescents is not based on the estimation of risk of CV events 
but rather on statistical distribution of BP values in general population. Thus, the 
definition of arterial hypertension in children is based on BP percentiles or Z-scores 
and not absolute blood pressure values. The currently used BP threshold defining 
arterial hypertension is the systolic and/or diastolic BP equal to or higher than the 
M. Litwin et al.5
95th percentile for age, sex and height [5]. The need for using BP percentile values 
rather than absolute BP values for children and adolescents is based on the BP 
changing with the development of the child. In adolescents, the situation is even 
more complicated as younger adolescents would fall within the child category with 
BP assessments recorded in percentiles, whereas older adolescents (≥16 years of 
age) may be considered as adults with BP measured in absolute values and criteria 
adopted by adult hypertension guidelines.
Although CV events and CV disease is rare in childhood, it is clear that elevated 
BP in childhood and adolescence evolves into arterial hypertension in adulthood. 
Thus, in 2004, the 4th Task Force Report adopted the JNC VII classification of BP 
status into paediatric guidelines [6]. According to the 4th Task Force Report, opti-
mal blood pressure has been defined as blood pressure below the 90th percentile for 
age, sex and height and/or below 120/80 mmHg. The BP values between the 90th 
and 95th percentile, or above 120/80 mmHg but below the 95th percentile, have 
been classified as prehypertension. However, this classification, both for adults and 
children has not been fully accepted in the European Union because the term “pre-
hypertension” implies a pre-disease state and suggests the need for treatment. Thus, 
the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) in its first paediatric guidelines on 
diagnosis and treatment of arterial hypertension in children and adolescents pro-
posed to use the term high-normal blood pressure for blood pressure values regarded 
as prehypertensive in the US classification system [7]. While the use of BP percen-
tiles and the 95th percentile as the upper limit of normal have been widely accepted 
for diagnosis and management of hypertension in younger children, adolescents 
from 16 years of age present a challenge when using BP percentiles for the defini-
tion of arterial hypertension and high-normal BP/prehypertension. Some boys aged 
16–18  years could not be diagnosed as hypertensive despite having systolic BP 
values above the adult threshold value of 140 mmHg, because the values of the 95th 
percentile for systolic BP are much higher than 140 mmHg. On the contrary, in girls 
aged 16–18 years the 95th percentile values for systolic BP may be in the range of 
132–135 mmHg, which means that they would be considered hypertensive by the 
paediatric definition based on percentiles but they would be normotensive or prehy-
pertensive based on the adult definition of absolute BP values (<140/90). Similar 
problems have been encountered in children with prehypertensive/high-normal BP, 
as the 90th percentile increases with age and may reach the threshold of 120 mmHg 
at 13 years of age in some adolescents. These problems have led to a new classifica-
tion of BP in children and adolescents as proposed by the ESH in 2016 [8]. In this 
new classification, adolescents aged 16 years and older have their BP status catego-
rized according to the classification for adults, i.e. based on absolute BP values. 
Moreover, the definition of BP categories proposed by ESH differs from the original 
classification by the 4th Task Force Report. ESH defines normal BP as BP below the 
90th percentile for children less than 16 years of age and below 130/85 mmHg in 
adolescents aged 16 years and older. Similarly, in children aged 16 and below, the 
high-normal BP has been defined as BP equal or higher than the 90th and lower than 
the 95th percentile, whereas in children 16–18 years of age the definition is based 
on absolute BP values between 130/85 and 139/89 mmHg. Thus, in contrast to the 1 High-Normal Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents6
US classification, the BP threshold of 120/80 mmHg for a prehypertensive range 
has not been adopted by the ESH. Importantly, in both US and EU classifications, 
the diagnosis of high-normal BP/prehypertension may be based on blood pressure 
values measured on one occasion, which may complicate the assessment of the 
prevalence of high-normal BP/prehypertension.
In addition to classification based on office BP measurements, prehypertension 
is also included in the classification of BP based on 24 h ambulatory blood pressure 
measurements (ABPM). According to paediatric ABPM classification, prehyperten-
sion is diagnosed when mean systolic and/or diastolic BP is below 95th percentile 
but BP load (percentile of BP readings above 95th percentile) is above 25% and 
below 50% [9].
1.4  Prevalence of High-Normal BP and Hypertension 
in Children and Adolescents
The real prevalence of high-normal BP/prehypertension in children and adolescents 
is difficult to assess due to several reasons. First, the definitions of prehypertension/
high-normal BP differ between US and Europe as discussed above [6, 8]. Second, 
the intrinsic variability in repeated BP measurements (even in one clinic setting) and 
inconsistency in interpretation of the repeated BP measurements (some authors 
record the first reading only, some prefer the second BP reading, some calculate the 
average of the second and third readings, etc.) result in a significant heterogeneity 
within published reports on prehypertension/high-normal BP. Third, the diagnosis 
of high-normal BP/prehypertension depends on the number of clinic visits. When 
the definition of prehypertension was based on BP measurements during only one 
visit (average of three BP readings), the prevalence of prehypertension and hyper -
tension was 9.4% and 9.5%, respectively [10]. However, after three screenings 
(clinic visits) the prevalence of prehypertension increased to 15.7% and the preva-
lence of arterial hypertension decreased to 3.2% [10]. These findings indicate that a 
large amount of adolescents labelled as hypertensive after their first BP screening 
become prehypertensive on subsequent visits. Similar findings of a decreasing prev-
alence of elevated BP in high-normal BP/prehypertensive range, was found with 
repeated measurements [11]. It was found that the prevalence of high-normal BP/
prehypertension in 9-year-old children was 12.6% when BP was measured during 
one visit, but decreased to 9% when BP was measured during three visits. However, 
the prevalence of high-normal BP/prehypertension increased with age; the preva-
lence of high-normal BP/prehypertension in 11-year-old children was 14.4% based 
on one BP measurement and 12.4% when BP was measured over three visits.
In a Polish nationwide study (OLAF) on 21, 414 randomly selected students 
aged 3–18 years the BP was assessed and documented as the mean of the second 
and third measurements during one visit. We found that the prevalence of high- 
normal BP (according to the ESH definition) ranged from 10.8% to 19.7% in boys 
and from 8.3% to 14.4% in girls aged 11 to 18 years, respectively. The prevalence 
of high-normal BP did not differ between sexes until 14 years of age, but started to 
M. Litwin et al.7
rise during a growth spurt, especially in boys (Figs.  1.1 and 1.2). As shown in 
Figs.  1.1 and 1.2, the prevalence of high-normal/prehypertension depends on the 
definition. When the definition based on the 4th Task Force Report guidelines was 
applied, the prevalence of high-normal blood pressure/prehypertension increased to 
49.7% and 25.9%, in boys and girls, respectively. These age- and sex-related differ -
ences in the prevalence of prehypertension/high-normal BP have also been reported 
in other ethnic groups [12]. The prevalence of prehypertension/high-normal BP is 
70102030frequency (%)405060
89 10 11 12
age (years)9,911,710,112,210,915,8
10,815,4
12,416,2
10,817,3
10,921,4
9,627,3
11,242,9
18,343,0
17,146,1
19,749,7
high-normal (EU) prehypertension (US)13 14 15 16 17 18
Fig. 1.1 Prevalence of high-normal BP (ESH definition) and prehypertension (4th Task Report 
definition) in sample of boys (n = 8321). OLAF Study, Poland
05101520frequency (%)253035
7 89 10 11 12
age (years)
high-normal (EU) prehypertension (US)13 14 15 16 17 1810,512,2 12,016,7
9,814,9
9,816,1
8,315,8
10,818,522,0
9,027,1
11,228,6
13,424,126,1 25,9
14,413,4
9,7
Fig. 1.2 Prevalence of high-normal BP (ESH definition) and prehypertension (4th Task Report 
definition) in sample of girls (n = 9107). OLAF Study, Poland1 High-Normal Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents8
related to ethnicity and socioeconomic status and these determinants are the same 
as in arterial hypertension cases. In a study from the USA it was found that prehy-
pertension was more common among African Americans and Hispanic adolescents 
than among White adolescents [10].
The other potential confounder in the assessment of high-normal BP prevalence 
is the method of BP measurement used. According to guidelines, the diagnosis of 
high-normal BP/prehypertension is based on office BP measurements. However, 
many patients who are referred with office hypertension undergo ABPM and are 
ultimately diagnosed with ambulatory prehypertension; this may lead to an under -
estimation of the true prevalence, as reported data on the prevalence of high-normal 
BP/prehypertension are usually based on office BP measurements only.
All these factors contribute to a significant variation in the prevalence ranging 
from 2.9% to 31%. However, regardless of the exact point prevalence estimate, it 
seems that the prevalence of high-normal BP/prehypertension increases over time 
as suggested by recent publications reporting a higher prevalence compared to ear -
lier reports [13].
1.5  Intermediate Clinical and Laboratory Phenotype 
of High-Normal BP/Prehypertension in Children
The intermediate phenotype of high-normal BP/prehypertensive children in terms 
of anthropometrical parameters and metabolic abnormalities is in the middle 
between normotensive children and children with primary hypertension (PH). The 
main finding in children and adolescents with high-normal BP/prehypertension is 
obesity and visceral obesity expressed as increased waist circumference [14, 15]. 
Children and adolescents with high-normal BP/prehypertension present similar 
metabolic abnormalities as the children with PH, namely insulin resistance which is 
otherwise typical of MS. However these abnormalities are of a lower magnitude in 
comparison with children with PH. Similar to children with PH, children with high- 
normal BP/prehypertension have higher serum uric acid levels than normotensive 
children. It was shown that in pre-pubertal children, the risk of high-normal BP/
prehypertension increased by 50% for each 1 mg/dL increase of serum uric acid 
concentration [16]. These metabolic abnormalities are associated with faster bio-
logical development, one of the main biological alterations seen across BP strata 
from normotension to PH in adolescents. In an analysis of data from NHANES II 
and III, Lauer et al. found that the level at which BP was tracked during childhood 
was related to growth, obesity and the degree of maturation acquired (expressed as 
bone age, number of permanent teeth, waist circumference). Children whose BP 
rose or fell in relation to their peers had body growth and maturation characteristics 
(bone age, number of permanent teeth, waist circumference) similar to those who 
maintained their rank order high or low, respectively [17]. In a study of adolescent 
boys referred to the hypertension clinic due to elevated BP, the difference between 
bone age and chronological age significantly increased from normotension through 
prehypertension, through stage 1 and stage 2 hypertension [18]. These findings 
M. Litwin et al.9
indicate that an intermediate phenotype of adolescents with high-normal BP/prehy-
pertension is similar to PH and also includes the basic alterations of the processes 
of biological development indicating a faster biological maturation associated with 
elevated BP values already in the prehypertensive range.
1.6  Evolution of High-Normal Blood Pressure/
Prehypertension in Childhood
High-normal BP/prehypertension exhibits a tracking phenomenon, i.e. children 
with high-normal BP/prehypertension would more likely continue to have high- 
normal BP/prehypertension in adulthood [19, 20]. In adults, as many as 26% of 
patients with prehypertension progressed to hypertension and those patients had a 
2.95 times higher risk of CV disease than those who remained at a normal BP or 
prehypertensive state [21]. It was shown that a significant number of children with 
high-normal BP/prehypertension progressed to PH later in life and had a worsening 
in cardiovascular outcome by midlife (i.e. 38 years of age) [22]. The overall inci-
dence of arterial hypertension in the general population of adolescents (10–19 years) 
is estimated to be 0.5–0.8%. Redwine et al. found that the rate of progression from 
normotension to hypertension, confirmed by three measurements on three indepen-
dent visits, was 0.4%/year; yet among adolescents who were prehypertensive it was 
1.1%/year [23, 24]. In those who had either a systolic or diastolic BP above the 95th 
percentile during their first measurement session and who had a BP which later 
normalized, (<90th percentile or 120/80 mmHg), the incidence rate was 1.4%/year, 
i.e. the same as among adults with optimal BP.
The recent report from Bogalusa Heart Study on 2732 adults aged 20–51 years 
who were followed from childhood showed a prevalence of arterial hypertension of 
23.5% [25]. However, those who became hypertensive had their BP in the prehyper -
tensive range as children and adolescents. Similar findings were reported in a longi-
tudinal representative birth cohort study from New Zealand, where SBP was 
reported at ages 7, 11, 18, 26, 32 and 38 years [22]. It was found that at an age of 
38 years, adults who became hypertensive had significantly higher SBP trajectory 
starting already during their 7th year of age and their SBP values were in a prehy-
pertensive range during childhood and adolescence up to mid-adulthood. These 
subjects also had the steepest rise of systolic BP during adolescence, attaining 
hypertensive values in early adulthood.
All these studies suggest that high-normal BP/prehypertension detected in child-
hood will most likely stay high-normal or increase to hypertensive levels later on in 
life at a much faster rate than among subjects with optimal BP. On the other hand, 
PH in adulthood develops from high-normal BP/prehypertension in adolescence. In 
some of these studies, adolescents ultimately labelled as high-normal BP/prehyper -
tensives were originally diagnosed as hypertensive and then lowered their BP to a 
prehypertensive range. In fact, in aforementioned studies BP classification was not 
confirmed by ABPM; thus a portion of prehypertensive subjects suffer from white- 
coat hypertension [26]. Moreover, high-normal BP and prehypertension include a 1 High-Normal Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents10
rather wide BP range (19/9 mmHg in US classification and 9/5 mmHg in ESH clas-
sification) and there are no data comparing risk of CV disease between those who 
were labelled as prehypertensive according to the 4th Task Force definition and 
those who were diagnosed as high-normal BP according to the ESH paediatric 
guidelines. Nevertheless, the risk of developing PH in adulthood by prehypertensive 
children concerns all patients in a prehypertensive range, but those who had higher 
BP values will develop PH faster than those who had a lower range of prehyperten-
sive values [22]. The above-mentioned findings indicate that PH has its origin in 
childhood; the crucial period determining future BP trajectory and risk of develop-
ment of PH is puberty and the pubertal growth spurt.
1.7  High-Normal Blood Pressure/Prehypertension 
in Childhood and Risk of Hypertensive Target Organ 
Damage
Elevated BP leads to adaptive changes of the CV system which, when elevated BP 
is sustained and accompanied by immuno-metabolic abnormalities, eventually 
leads to hypertensive target organ damage (TOD). Although there are only few 
reports on early subclinical TOD in adolescents with high-normal BP/prehyperten-
sion, it is now clear that there is a continuous increase in the risk of hypertensive 
TOD across all spectrums of BP values. These early subclinical changes include an 
increase of left ventricular mass index (LVMi), increased carotid intima-media 
thickness (cIMT), increased stiffness of large arteries expressed as pulse wave 
velocity (PWV), endothelial dysfunction assessed as flow mediated dilation (FMD) 
and early remodelling of small capillaries.
It was found that LVMi of prehypertensive adolescents was greater than in nor -
motensive peers and did not differ significantly in comparison with hypertensive 
adolescents [27] and was of an intermediate nature between normotensive and 
hypertensive children [28]. Similarly, in a population study including 526 children 
aged 6–15 years, it was found that increasing BP and the presence of prehyperten-
sion (defined as BP in the 90–95th percentile) and arterial hypertension (but not 
obesity) were associated with concentric cardiac remodelling [15]. Heart rate, a 
clinical surrogate of the sympathetic drive, also increased within the BP category 
from normotension through prehypertension to hypertension. There is also evidence 
that arterial wall remodelling starts in prehypertensive youths. Although it was 
reported that prehypertensive adolescents had numerically increased cIMT in com-
parison with normotensive peers, significant differences were found in the carotid 
bulb and the internal carotid artery [28]. However, these alterations were modified 
by metabolic abnormalities which accompanied elevated BP.
Increased cIMT in prehypertensive adolescents is accompanied by increased 
stiffness of the arterial tree. It was reported that carotid-femoral, carotid radial and 
carotid-dorsal PWV were all significantly increased in prehypertensive adoles-
cents when compared with normotensives [28, 29]. It was also found that PWV of 
prehypertensive youths was intermediate between normotensive and hypertensive 
M. Litwin et al.11
subjects [28]. High-normal BP/prehypertension also exerts its effects on the level 
of microcirculation. Prehypertensive youths present with early remodelling of 
retinal arterial vessels which are expressed as central retinal arteriolar equiva-
lents, representing an average arteriolar diameter and are similar to those found in 
hypertensive adolescents and different from normotensive controls [30]. In sum-
mary, high- normal BP/prehypertension is associated with significant adaptive 
changes in the whole CV system, including the left ventricle, remodelled arterial 
and arteriolar walls and increased arterial stiffness. These changes are intermedi-
ate between those found in normotensive and hypertensive children. The above-
described early alterations of CV structure and function were modified by 
metabolic abnormalities and obesity. This is yet further evidence suggesting that 
high-normal BP/prehypertension is not an isolated hemodynamic alteration but 
rather a neuro-immuno- metabolic disease with hemodynamic consequences and 
signs of early vascular ageing [31, 32].
1.8  Risk of High-Normal BP/Prehypertension 
in Adolescence and Target Organ Damage 
and Cardiovascular Disease in Adulthood
At present it is evident from large longitudinal population studies, where elevated 
BP was defined as higher than the 90th percentile or 120/80 mmHg, that high-  
normal BP/prehypertension in adolescence is related not only to adaptive changes 
detected in adolescence but also to the risk of development of hypertensive TOD 
and CV disease in adulthood. The data was obtained from four studies (The 
Muscatine Study, Bogalusa Heart Study, Young Finns Study and CDAH Study) in 
which BP was measured on a minimum of four occasions in adolescent subjects 
(11.9–14.6 years of age) followed for a mean of 23 years. Individuals with persis-
tently elevated BP (>90th percentile or >120/80  mmHg) had significantly 
increased cIMT in comparison with those who had optimal BP [33]. However, the 
risk of increased cIMT in early adulthood was lower if the subjects had elevated 
BP during adolescence which resolved by adulthood. Liang et al. also showed that 
the risk of development of PH and hypertensive arterial remodelling (increase of 
cIMT and carotid-femoral PWV) in early adulthood (mean age 34.5 years) was 
already increased in those adolescents who had a BP above the 80th percentile 
and below the 95th percentile, thus below the lower threshold of the prehyperten-
sive range [34].
1.9  How to Manage High-Normal Blood Pressure 
in Children and Adolescents
According to guidelines, high-normal BP should be treated with non- pharmacological 
measures [8]. The exception is that in children with diabetes mellitus (DM) or  
CKD, pharmacological therapy should also be instituted [35]. The basis of 1 High-Normal Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents12
non-pharmacological therapy is directed to main risk factors of PH and CV disease, 
i.e. obesity, associated metabolic abnormalities and physical inactivity. Thus, non- 
pharmacological treatment is based on lifestyle changes with dietary advice and 
moderate to intensive physical activity of at least 60–90 min daily. Although the 
efficacy of physical aerobic exercise in young adults with prehypertension has been 
questioned recently, detailed analysis shows that it is quite effective when applied 
and accepted by individuals [36]. Recent meta-analysis of efficacy during physical 
exercise in young adults (mean age 42.2 years) with prehypertension, defined as BP 
above 120/80 mmHg and below 140/90 mmHg, revealed that after 3–6 months after 
starting the intervention, systolic and diastolic BP decreased on average by −4.4 
and 4.1  mmHg, respectively, but after 12  months this effect was lost. However, 
analysis of factors associated with the loss of hypotensive effects of physical exer -
cise revealed that it was due to an increasing rate of patient non-compliance. Thus, 
the main reason of low efficacy of physical exercise in young adults was the loss of 
interest and a return to their previous sedentary lifestyle. Interestingly, BP reduction 
was greater when physical exercise was of vigorous intensity, when it was super -
vised and when it was associated with significant weight loss. One of the most 
important factors associated with long-term success of this type of therapy was due 
to frequency and duration of contact with health care professionals. These findings 
underscore the fact that similarly to the pharmacological therapy, non-compliance is 
the main reason for the lack of effect of non-pharmacological therapy. The other 
conclusion is that young patients with high-normal BP/prehypertension are by defi-
nition less physically active and therefore organized/supervised programmes of 
moderate to vigorous physical activity would be more effective than self-directed 
low intensity activities. Such conclusions are supported by the results acquired dur -
ing treatment in adolescents with PH. Twelve months of pharmacological and non- 
pharmacological treatment, based on angiotensin convertase inhibitors (ACEi) or 
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) and physical exercise in 86 adolescents with 
PH, caused normalization of BP in 70% of patients, a decrease in the prevalence of 
metabolic syndrome by 50%, normalization of markers of oxidative stress, along 
with the regression of left ventricular hypertrophy and subclinical arterial injury. 
However, the main determinant of TOD regression was not due to a decrease of BP 
but rather a decrease of waist circumference and amount of visceral fat, assessed by 
magnetic resonance [37].
There are only a few paediatric studies analysing the effects of non-  
pharmacological treatment in children with high-normal BP/prehypertension. 
Most of them have included children with obesity who had elevated BP and who 
underwent programmes of dietary and physical activity treatment. Fapour-
Lambert et al. reported results from a 3-month randomized controlled trial on the 
effects of physical activity treatment in pre-pubertal obese children with elevated 
BP (high-normal BP/prehypertension and hypertension) [38]. The study showed 
that moderate intensity training over a 3-month period (60 min three times weekly) 
led to significant improvements in endothelial function measured as FMD and 
M. Litwin et al.13
nitroglycerin- mediated dilation, along with a decrease in BP and arterial stiffness. 
These changes were associated with a decrease in body fat and visceral fat. A 
subgroup of patients was followed for 2 years in whom beneficial effects of physi-
cal training on BP were sustained, especially in the children who decreased their 
body mass index [39]. Importantly, it occurred that the increased physical activity 
was maintained beyond the end of the 3 month intervention. This observation sug-
gests that lifestyle changes may be implemented with greater success in paediatric 
patients than in adults.
Although the role of dietary advice and dietary modifications has been well 
established, it seems that the effects of physical activity on BP and arterial function 
continue to be more significant. Woo et al. analysed the effects of diet along with 
diet plus exercise on arterial properties of obese children of a mean age of 10 years 
(9–12 years) [40]. He found that although both interventions led to a significant 
decrease of waist-to-hip ratio and the improvement of FMD within 6 weeks, these 
changes were of a greater magnitude when diet was combined with training. 
Importantly, these beneficial changes were even more evident after 1 year in the 
children who continued their dietary and physical activity programmes, yet 
decreased in those who resigned from the programme.
In conclusion, non-pharmacological interventions based on dietary modifica-
tions and physical activity of moderate to vigorous intensity not only lead to nor -
malization of BP but also exert beneficial effects on arterial structure and function 
by normalizing metabolic abnormalities.
1.10  High-Normal Blood Pressure/Prehypertension 
in Children with Chronic Kidney Disease and Diabetic 
Children
In contrast to the general population, children with CKD and those with DM, a BP 
in the high-normal/prehypertensive range is regarded as an indication for treatment 
and should be treated pharmacologically. In CKD, the reason for pharmacological 
treatment of high-normal BP/prehypertension is not only early prevention of CV 
disease, but also renoprotection based on ACEi or ARBs. The goal of BP lowering 
therapy depends on proteinuria; in children with proteinuria greater than 0.5 g/day, 
BP should be lowered below 50 pc of the 24 h mean arterial BP. In the absence of 
significant proteinuria, the BP should be lowered below 90 pc of the 24 h mean arte-
rial BP and preferably below 75 pc [31, 32, 35].
As in CKD, the aim of antihypertensive treatment in diabetic children is both 
early prevention of diabetic kidney disease and CV protection. In general, BP in 
diabetic children should be kept below 90 pc for age, sex and height. In both dia-
betic children and children with CKD, a more aggressive therapy is indicated along 
with close monitoring of BP by home BP measurements and repeated ABPM 
measurements.1 High-Normal Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents14
1.11  Summary and Perspectives
There is strong evidence that high-normal BP/prehypertension in childhood and 
adolescence tracks to adulthood, leads to early development of PH and represents a 
risk factor for CV disease in the fourth decade of life. The adaptive changes of the 
CV system associated with high-normal BP/prehypertension develop in childhood 
and are accompanied by neuro-immuno-metabolic abnormalities typical of PH and 
MS. Normalization of high-normal BP/prehypertension lowers the risk of develop-
ment of hypertensive TOD and CV disease in adulthood. Interventions based on 
lifestyle changes with dietary advice and increased physical activity are more effi-
cient when started early and include all family members, but long-term prospective 
studies are lacking in prehypertensive children. On the contrary, the close associa-
tion between increased arterial stiffness in adulthood and BP in the range of prehy-
pertensive values in childhood suggests that the threshold of abnormal BP should be 
lowered to the 90th percentile [41]. Consequently, adolescents with high-normal 
BP/prehypertension may benefit from a wider diagnostic workup with an assess-
ment of TOD and metabolic CV risk factors, combined with antihypertensive 
treatment.
References
 1. Vasan R, Larson M, Leip E, Evans J, O’Doneel CJ, Kannel WB, Levy D. Impact of high- 
normal blood pressure on the risk of cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1291–7.
 2. Fernandez C, Sander GE, Giles TD. Prehypertension: defining the transitional phenotype. Curr 
Hypertens Rep. 2016;18:2.
 3. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. Seventh report of the joint national committee 
on prevention, detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood pressure. Hypertension. 
2003;42:1206–52.
 4. Feber J, Litwin M. Blood pressure (BP) assessment-from BP level to BP variability. Pediatr 
Nephrol. 2016;31:1071–9.
 5. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Report of the task force on blood pressure control 
in children. Pediatrics. 1977;59:797–820.
 6. National High Blood Pressure Education Program Working Group on High Blood Pressure 
in Children and Adolescents. The fourth report on the diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment of 
high blood pressure in children and adolescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114:555–76.
 7. Lurbe E, Cifkova R, Cruickshank JK, Dillon MJ, Ferreira I, Invitti C, Kuznetsova T, Laurent 
S, Mancia G, Morales-Olivas F, Rascher W, Redon J, Schaefer F, Seeman T, Stergiou G, 
Wühl E, Zanchetti A, European Society of Hypertension. Management of high blood pressure 
in children and adolescents: recommendations of the European Society of Hypertension. J 
Hypertens. 2009;27:1719–42.
 8. Lurbe E, Agabiti-Rosei E, Cruickshank JK, Dominiczak A, Erdine S, Hirth A, Invitti C, Litwin 
M, Mancia G, Pall D, Rascher W, Redon J, Schaefer F, Seeman T, Sinha M, Stabouli S, Webb 
NJ, Wühl E, Zanchetti A. European Society of Hypertension guidelines for the management of 
high blood pressure in children and adolescents. J Hypertens. 2016;34:1887–920.
 9. Flynn JT, Daniels SR, Hayman LL, Maahs DM, McCrindle BW, Mitsnefes M, Zachariah 
JP.  Urbina EM; American Heart Association Atherosclerosis, Hypertension and Obesity in 
Youth Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young: Update: ambula-
tory blood pressure monitoring in children and adolescents: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Hypertension. 2014;63:1116–35.
M. Litwin et al.15
 10. McNiece KL, Poffenbarger TS, Turner JL, Franco K, Sorof J, Portman R. Prevalence of pre-
hypertension and hypertension among adolescents. J Pediatr. 2007;150:640–4.
 11. Marcovecchio ML, Mohn A, Diddi G, Polidori N, Chiarelli F, Fuiano N. Longitudinal assess-
ment of blood pressure in school-aged children: a 3-year follow-up study. Pediatr Cardiol. 
2016;37:255–61.
 12. Xu T, Zhu G, Liu J, Han S. Gender-specific prevalence and associated risk factors of high 
normal blood pressure and hypertension among multi-ethnic Chinese adolescents aged 8–18 
years old. Blood Press. 2015;24:189–95.
 13. Liang YJ, Xi B, Hu YH, Wang C, Liu JT, Yan YK, et al. Trends in blood pressure and hyperten-
sion among Chinese children and adolescents: China health and nutrition surveys 1991–2004. 
Blood Press. 2011;20:45–53.
 14. Acosta AA, Samuels JA, Portman RJ, Redwine KM. Prevalence of persistent prehypertension 
among adolescents. J Pediatr. 2012;160:757–61.
 15. Pieruzzi F, Antolini L, Salerno FR, Giussani M, Brambilla P, Galbiati S, Mastriani S, Rebora P, 
Stella A, Valsecchi MG, Genovesi S. The role of blood pressure, body weight and fat distribu-
tion on left ventricular mass, diastolic function and cardiac geometry in children. J Hypertens. 
2015;33:1182–92.
 16. Viazzi F, Antolini L, Giussani M, Brambilla P, Galbiati S, Mastriani S, Stella A, Pontremoli R, 
Valsecchi MG, Genovesi S. Serum uric acid and blood pressure in children at cardiovascular 
risk. Pediatrics. 2013;132:e93–9.
 17. Lauer RM, Anderson AR, Beaglehole R, Burns TL. Factors related to tracking of blood pres-
sure in children. U.S. National Center for Health Statistics Health Examination Surveys Cycles 
II and III. Hypertension. 1984;6:307–14.
 18. Pludowski P, Litwin M, Niemirska A, Jaworski M, Sladowska J, Kryskiewicz E, Karczmarewicz 
E, Neuhoff-Murawska J, Wierzbicka A, Lorenc RS. Accelarated skeletal maturation in chil-
dren with primary hypertension. Hypertension. 2009;54:1234–9.
 19. Banker A, Bell C, Gupta-Malhotra M, Samuels J. Blood pressure percentile charts to identify 
high or low blood pressure in children. BMC Pediatr. 2016;16:98.
 20. Kagura J, Adair LS, Musa MG, Pettifor JM, Norris SA. Blood pressure tracking in urban black 
South African children: birth to twenty cohort. BMC Pediatr. 2015;15:78.
 21. Ishikawa Y , Ishikawa J, Ishikawa S, Kario K, Kajii E, Jichi Medical School Cohort  
Investigators Group. Progression from prehypertension to hypertension and risk of  
cardiovascular disease. J Epidemiol. 2017;27:8–13.
 22. Theodore RF, Broadbent J, Nagin D, Ambler A, Hogan S, Ramrakha S, Cutfield W, Williams 
MJ, Harrington H, Moffitt TE, Caspi A, Milne B, Poulton R. Childhood to early-midlife sys-
tolic blood pressure trajectories: early-life predictors, effect modifiers, and adult cardiovascu-
lar outcomes. Hypertension. 2015;66:1108–15.
 23. Redwine KM, Acosta AA, Poffenbarger T, Portman RJ, Samuels J. Development of hyperten-
sion in adolescents with pre-hypertension. J Pediatr. 2012;160:98–103.
 24. Redwine KM, Falkner B. Progression of prehypertension to hypertension in adolescents. Curr 
Hypertens Rep. 2012;14:619–25.
 25. Shen W, Zhang T, Li S, Zhang H, Xi B, Shen H, Fernandez C, Bazzano L, He J, Chen W. Race 
and sex differences of lon-term blood pressure profiles from childhood and adult hypertension. 
The Bogalusa Heart Study. Hypertension. 2017;70:66–74.
 26. Obrycki Ł, Niemirska A, Sarnecki J, Kulaga Z, Litwin M. Central systolic blood pressure and 
central pulse pressure as predictors of left ventricular hypertrophy in hypertensive children. 
ESH 2017, Abstract.
 27. Stabouli S, Kotsis V , Rizos Z, Toumanidis S, Karagianni C, Constantopoulos A, Zakopoulos 
N. Left ventricular mass in normotensive, prehypertensive and hypertensive children and ado-
lescents. Pediatr Nephrol. 2009;24:1545–51.
 28. Urbina EM, Khoury PR, McCoy C, Daniels SR, Kimball TR, Dolan LM. Cardiac and vascular 
consequences of pre-hypertension in youth. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2011;13:332–42.
 29. Zhu H, Yan W, Ge D, Treiber FA, Harshfield GA, Kapuku G, Snieder H, Dong Y . Cardiovascular 
characteristics in American youth with prehypertension. Am J Hypertens. 2007;20:1051–7.1 High-Normal Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents16
 30. Murgan I, Beyer S, Kotliar KE, Weber L, Bechtold-Dalla Pozza S, Dalla Pozza D, Wegner A, 
Sitnikova D, Stock D, Stock K, Heemann U, Schmaderer C, Baumann M. Arterial and retinal 
changes in hypertensive and prehypertensive adolescents. Am J Hypertens. 2013;26:400–8.
 31. Litwin M, Feber J, Niemirska A, Michałkiewicz J. Primary hypertension is a disease of prema-
ture vascular aging associated with neuro-immuno-metabolic abnormalities. Pediatr Nephrol. 
2016a;31:185–94.
 32. Litwin M, Feber J, Ruzicka M. Vascular Aging: Lessons From Pediatric Hypertension. Can J 
Cardiol. 2016b;32:642–9.
 33. Juhola J, Magnussen CG, Berenson GS, Venn A, Burns TL, Sabin MA, Srinivasan SR, Daniels 
SR, Davis PH, Chen W, Kähönen M, Taittonen L, Urbina E, Viikari JS, Dwyer T, Raitakari 
OT, Juonala M. Combined effects of child and adult elevated blood pressure on subclinical 
atherosclerosis: the International Childhood Cardiovascular Cohort Consortium. Circulation. 
2013;128:217–24.
 34. Liang Y , Hou D, Shan X, Zhao X, Hu Y , Jiang B, Wang L, Liu J, Cheng H, Yang P, Shan X, 
Yan Y , Chowienczyk PJ, Mi J. Cardiovascular remodeling relates to elevated childhood blood 
pressure: Beijing Blood Pressure Cohort Study. Int J Cardiol. 2014;20:836–9.
 35. Wühl E, Trivelli A, Picca S, Litwin M, Peco-Antic A, Zurowska A, Testa S, Jankauskiene 
A, Emre S, Caldas-Afonso A, Anarat A, Niaudet P, Mir S, Bakkaloglu A, Enke B, Montini 
G, Wingen AM, Sallay P, Jeck N, Berg U, Caliskan S, Wygoda S, Hohbach-Hohenfellner K, 
Dusek J, Urasinski T, Arbeiter K, Neuhaus T, Gellermann J, Drozdz D, Fischbach M, Möller 
K, Wigger M, Peruzzi L, Mehls O, Schaefer F, ESCAPE Trial Group. Strict blood-pressure 
control and progression of renal failure in children. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1639–50.
 36. Williamson W, Foster C, Reid H, Kelly P, Lewandowski AJ, Boardman H, Roberts N, 
McCartney D, Huckstep O, Newton J, Dawes H, Gerry S, Leeson P. Will exercise advice be 
sufficient for treatment of young adults with prehypertension and hypertension? A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Hypertension. 2016;68:78–87.
 37. Litwin M, Niemirska A, Sladowska-Kozlowska J, Wierzbicka A, Janas R, Wawer ZT, 
Wisniewski A, Feber J. Regression of target organ damage in children and adolescents with 
primary hypertension. Pediatr Nephrol. 2010;25:2489–99.
 38. Farpour-Lambert NJ, Aggoun Y , Marchand LM, Martin XE, Herrmann FR, Beghetti 
M. Physical activity reduces systemic blood pressure and improves early markers of athero-
sclerosis in pre-pubertal obese children. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:2396–406.
 39. Maggio AB, Aggoun Y , Martin XE, Marchand LM, Beghetti M, Farpour-Lambert NJ. Long- 
term follow-up of cardiovascular risk factors after exercise training in obese children. Int J 
Pediatr Obes. 2011;6:e603–1.
 40. Woo KS, Chook P, Yu CW, Sung RY , Qiao M, Leung SS, Lam CW, Metreweli C, Celermajer 
DS. Effects of diet and exercise on obesity-related vascular dysfunction in children. Circulation. 
2004;109:1981–6.
 41. Aatola H, Magnussen CG, Koivistoinen T, Hutri-Kähönen N, Juonala M, Viikari JS, Lehtimäki 
T, Raitakari OT, Kähönen M. Simplified definitions of elevated pediatric blood pressure and 
high adult arterial stiffness. Pediatrics. 2013;132:e70–6.
M. Litwin et al.17 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_2
R. Zimlichman ( *) 
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
e-mail: zimlich@post.tau.ac.il 
S. Julius 
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
e-mail: sjulius@umich.edu 
G. Mancia 
Emeritus Professor of Medicine, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
e-mail: giuseppe.mancia@unimib.it2History of Prehypertension: Past 
and Present, a Saga of 
Misunderstanding and Neglect
Reuven Zimlichman, Stevo Julius, and Giuseppe Mancia
The blood pressure measurements became an important clinical tool only a century 
ago, when Riva Rocci and Korotkoff demonstrated how to use sphygmomanometers 
to measure the blood pressure in clinical practice. During this relatively short period 
there was a substantial variation in the definitions of normal and pathologic blood 
pressure levels [1, 2]. The impact of this variability on the management or treatment 
of prehypertension and hypertension will be discussed later. At this point it is appro-
priate to underscore that already in ancient times, by evaluating the pulse, medical 
practitioners were capable to assess patient’s cardiovascular health. Ancient records, 
as far back as 2600 BC, reported that acupuncture, venesection [3], and bleeding by 
leeches were the sole means of treating what was called “hard pulse disease.” The 
Ashurbanipal Library at Nineveh (669–626 BC) contains details on the use of the 
latter two procedures [4]. Remarkable work was done by the Yellow Emperor of 
China (Chou You-J, 2600 BC), Wang (280 BC), and the Roman Cornelius Celsus 
[5]. Galen (131–201  AD) [6], Erisitrates, and Hippocrates [5] all recommended 
venesection. Sorovas of Ephesus in 120  AD recommended cupping the spine to 
draw out animal spirits [4]. Thanks to two students of medical history [3, 4] we can 
presently wonder about the wisdom of our ancient colleagues. As early as 2600 BC 
the Yellow Emperor explained that “In order to examine whether Ying or Yang 
prevail one must distinguish a gentle pulse from hard and bounding pulse. The 18
hearth influences the force and fills the pulse with blood.” Furthermore, he stated 
that “If too much salt is used in food, the pulse hardens.” He also understood the 
relationship between hypertension and congestive heart failure by stating that “when 
the pulse is abundant but tense and hard like a cord, there are dropsical spellings 
(edema).” Ancient doctors also understood the relationship between excessive food 
intake and negative health outcomes. Physical exercise as well as decrease in eating 
were routinely recommended. The Arabic text Al-Azkhora stated that “ Nothing is 
more harmful to an aging person than to have a clever cook and a beautiful 
concubine.”
Since the early nineteens, in the modern era of blood pressure measurement, 
when the use of sphygmomanometers became ubiquitous, the cutoff levels for nor -
malcy became a moving target and remained such, up till present times. In the late 
1950s, when thiazide diuretics were introduced, hypertension was defined as blood 
pressure levels greater than 180/100  mmHg. However, during the succeeding 
decades, based on the results of blood pressure lowering trials, the cutoff decreased 
considerably [7, 8].
In parallel with studies reporting results of antihypertensive treatment, epidemio-
logic investigations uniformly confirmed that elevation of blood pressure is a strong 
predictor of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. However, the interpretation of 
these findings varied. In fact, the management of hypertension is a classic example 
of how, facing the same data, people may come to opposing conclusions. All 
branches of science must develop a nomenclature for the observed data. 
Unfortunately, in prehypertension and hypertension the semantics of some terms is 
confusing. A good example is the term “hypertonie essential” coined by Frank in 
1925 [9]. It is not quite clear why Frank chose the term “essential” but it can mean 
two different things. Essential may mean “absolutely necessary, extremely impor -
tant” but in medicine it also means “disease with not known cause, idiopathic.” One 
would think that such a semantic issue would not cause a problem, but the fact is 
that a group of physicians believed that the increased blood pressure is an appropri-
ate response to secure the perfusion of tissues in people with increased peripheral 
resistance. They predicted that lowering the blood pressure would have catastrophic 
consequences.
In the 1950s, the development of the first ganglionic blockers sharpened the dis-
pute about the benefit of blood pressure reduction. Mainly pioneering and progres-
sive physicians dared to treat their patients with ganglion blockers despite the 
serious side effects. While discussing the cost-effectiveness of treating severe 
hypertension, Pickering reported in 1961 that the five-year survival rate in malig-
nant hypertension was zero. But already in 1958, Dustan reported a survival rate of 
33% in patients treated with malignant hypertension [10]. The debate regarding the 
cost-effectiveness of treating hypertension continued. Nonetheless, the publication 
of the US Veteran study in 1967 reported dramatic improvement in survival in the 
subgroup of patients with diastolic blood pressure of about 110 mmHg [11]. By this 
point, treatment of hypertension was fully justified and the focus shifted to popula-
tions with milder forms of hypertension. In parallel, since the goal of treatment was 
to normalize the blood pressure, it was important to define normalcy.
R. Zimlichman et al.19
The term “normal” has numerous connotations, ranging from a statistical defini-
tion based on variables in healthy people to meanings such as “most common” and 
“most desirable” [12]. Furthermore, the term “normal” is problematic because it 
determines that what is not “normal” is “abnormal” [13]. A meta-analysis of epide-
miological cohort published in 2002 showed an association of a blood pressure 
reading of 115/75 mmHg with a minimal risk of cardiovascular mortality, and thus 
concluded that this constitutes an optimal blood pressure level [14]. However, this 
mean value did not provide information about the risk in individual subjects. 
Definitions of normal and abnormal blood pressure are further complicated by the 
fact that blood pressure, on a population level, is a continuous variable with a 
Gaussian distribution, i.e., without any clear point that would denote abnormality 
because the relationship between systolic and diastolic blood pressure and cardio-
vascular risk is continuous. In a large study that reviewed data of about one million 
individuals, mortality from cardiovascular disease increased exponentially from 
blood pressure levels as low as 115/75 mmHg, with an approximate doubling of the 
risk for every 20/10 mmHg increase above that level [14, 15].
Over time, various terms have been used to classify the degrees of hypertension 
such as mild, moderate, and severe hypertension; and systolic, diastolic, and systo- 
diastolic hypertension. On the lower end of classification numerous terms were used 
to define the group of subjects whose blood pressure was slightly elevated above 
normal but not yet in the hypertension range. There was substantial research interest 
in this group but the nomenclature varied. The terms “borderline hypertension,” 
“high-normal blood pressure,” and “borderline blood pressure elevation” were most 
frequently used. In this millennium, in 2003, the American seventh report of the 
Joint National Committee on Hypertension revitalized the term “prehypertension” 
[8] and defined it as a blood pressure range of 120–139/80–89 mmHg. Nonetheless, 
this definition was controversial and many physicians felt that a large number of 
healthy individuals would be labeled as having as a medical diagnosis. This, in turn, 
might create anxiety and indicate pharmaceutical treatment in the absence of evi-
dence that lowering blood pressure from this range is beneficial. Previously, in 
1984, the Joint National Committee on the Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of 
High Blood Pressure introduced the concept of high-normal blood pressure (blood 
pressure in the 130–139/85–89 mmHg range), due to the concern that a moderate 
blood pressure elevation which was previously considered normal, could increase 
the risk of premature cardiovascular morbidity and mortality and lead to the devel-
opment of established hypertension much more frequently than the lower blood 
pressure range of normal or optimal blood pressure [16]. Nevertheless, the purpose 
of this action was only to promote awareness in order to stimulate lifestyle modifi-
cation and the document did not discuss whether and when should pharmacologic 
blood pressure lowering be considered.
It is well known that if patients are not receiving antihypertensive treatment their 
blood pressure will increase. The increase is exponential and with passage of time 
the rise becomes more and more rapid. Just as the size of skeletal muscles grows in 
response to repetitive increases of exercise, the smooth muscles in the resistance 
vessels (arterioles) also respond to repetitive bouts of higher blood pressure by 2 History of Prehypertension: Past and Present20
decrease of their lumen. This in turn increases the vascular resistance and blood 
pressure [17].
The fact that untreated blood pressure elevation increases exponentially [14] pro-
vided the rationale for the TROPHY (Trial of Preventing Hypertension) study. This 
trial [18] recruited 772 patients with blood pressure of 130–139 and/or 85–89 mmHg 
and followed them over a period of 4 years. One group was randomized to 4 years 
of placebo treatment and the other group was treated with the angiotensin receptor 
blocker candesartan for 2 years. After 2 years, patients in the candesartan group 
were switched to placebo. The hypothesis was that 2 years of previous treatment 
would prevent or postpone the development of stage 1 hypertension during the 
2 years of placebo observation. Following are the results of the study: (1) Treatment 
with candesartan was safe. Rates of adverse events during the 2 years of treatment 
were similar in both groups. (2) During the 4 years of observation nearly two-thirds 
of the placebo group developed stage 1 hypertension. Thus, marginal blood pressure 
elevation at baseline forecasts future hypertension and “prehypertension” is the 
appropriate term for patients whose baseline blood pressure is in the 130–139 and 
or 85–89 mmHg range. (3) The risk of new onset hypertension in the previously 
actively treated group was suppressed. Whereas the difference was statistically sig-
nificant, the actual difference was modest. The overall conclusion of the study was 
that pharmacological treatment of prehypertension is feasible but the findings were 
not sufficiently robust to mandate treatment.
The PHARAO study also showed that blood pressure lowering in prehyperten-
sion is safe using the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor ramipril [19].
Whether subjects with a high-normal blood pressure need medical treatment had 
of course to be ultimately tested by trials in which the goal was prevention of car -
diovascular events. Little evidence of this kind has ever been made available, how-
ever, for two reasons. First, because in the high-normal blood pressure range 
cardiovascular risk is lower than in hypertensive patients these trials had to be larger 
or based on longer follow-up than usual trials, thereby representing a difficult 
research option. Second, trials showing (mostly by subgroup analysis) that reducing 
blood pressure from a high-normal range was accompanied by a reduction of car -
diovascular events had made use of patients already under antihypertensive treat-
ment, and thus most likely with an original frank blood pressure elevation, this 
being the case also for the meta-analyses of the available studies. The response in 
the media to the possibility of expanding treatment to this large subject category 
was also unsupportive and accusations like “disease mongering” were campaigned 
in the press.
In the above context, two recent important trials are ACCORD [20] and SPRINT 
[21] that aimed to determine the optimal target blood pressure to reduce morbidity 
and mortality, in type 2 diabetic and nondiabetic patients, respectively. Although the 
interpretation of their results has raised some controversy. These trials have scored 
in favor of blood pressure targets lower than the traditional ones (<140/90 mmHg) 
because patients randomized to an on-treatment systolic blood pressure <120 mmHg 
(achieved value slightly >120 mmHg) showed a reduction of cardiovascular out-
comes compared to patients randomized to <140  mmHg (achieved value about 
R. Zimlichman et al.21
135 mmHg), an incremental benefit that in SPRINT extended to all-cause mortality 
as well. These findings influenced the guidelines issued in November 2017 by the 
American College of Cardiology (ACC) and the American Heart Association 
(AHA) recommend the blood pressure target for treatment to be <130 mmHg sys-
tolic value in virtually all hypertensive individuals. The American guidelines rec-
ommended to lower the blood pressure range at which physicians should initiate 
antihypertensive drug treatment because in both trials initial systolic blood pressure 
was <140 mmHg, thereby falling in the high-normal blood pressure range. This is 
not immune from criticism, because as for the abovementioned data in both 
ACCORD and SPRINT patients received antihypertensive treatment at baseline. In 
the meantime, new data suggested that in untreated subjects with high-normal blood 
pressure blood pressure lowering does not reduce cardiovascular events. However, 
the exception is in patients who have a history of cardiovascular events and are 
therefore at very high risk. Presently the high-normal blood pressure range is con-
sidered to be a condition in which active blood pressure lowering treatment is indi-
cated, albeit only when background risk is elevated. This progress along the line 
formerly traced by the TROPHY study which championed years ago the idea that 
treatment might benefit subjects even before the state of established hypertension.
Extension of active antihypertensive treatment to the high-normal blood pressure 
range has prompted the ACC/AHA guidelines to modify the classification of hyper -
tension stages, stage 1 being now the former prehypertension [22]. The implementa-
tion of the recently proposed definition for hypertension will classify nearly half 
(46%) of the adult US population as hypertensive. The new guidelines do not neces-
sarily mean that half the adult population in the USA and in other developed coun-
tries should receive medical treatment. Rather, the focus is on individuals with a 
suboptimal blood pressure, in an effort to convince them to make lifestyle changes 
and to reduce their cardiovascular risk. Nonetheless, the number of persons that will 
be treated with pharmacologic agents will increase and this will include patients 
who were not pharmacologically treated before.
Due to the changing definition of hypertension over the course of decades, it was 
only natural that the definition of prehypertension would change too. For many 
years, the notion was widely accepted that “the higher the blood pressure, the higher 
the morbidity and mortality.” Diagnosing and treating persons in the higher blood 
pressure group has been recognized as the main goal, due to their propensity to 
faster and more severe end-organ damage. However, the fact that the total number 
of persons with prehypertension outnumbers those with overt hypertension has been 
underestimated. Moreover, therapeutic options in the early 1900s were very limited, 
and entailed severe side effects. Treatment with medications such as ganglion block-
ers was known not to be simple, due to the multiple side effects that impaired qual-
ity of life. Thus, the cost-effectiveness of the treatment was justified mainly for high 
risk patients.
Surprisingly, during this period, most of the information about blood pressure on 
the population level, and associated risks of morbidity and mortality, was accumu-
lated by insurance companies and these data were evaluated by physicians and 
medical statisticians employed by these companies. The insurance viewpoint of an 2 History of Prehypertension: Past and Present22
impairment differs from the clinical viewpoint, yet they do not contradict one 
another. Clinical studies and insurance medicine benefited greatly from each other, 
and this was true in the early 1900s as it is today. The difference between the 
approaches is that insurance medicine deals mainly with data of large groups, while 
clinical medicine focuses on individuals. However, to benefit individuals, clinical 
medicine needs information about morbidity and mortality in large populations 
[23]. Life insurance companies mainly study mortality, but also morbidity. Clearly, 
all people die eventually, but insurance companies determine the longevity of sub-
groups of populations and correlate them with various medical conditions. Clinical 
medicine deals more with quality of life, while insurance medicine deals with finan-
cial aspects of prognosis. Insurance companies deserve credit for most of the early 
knowledge that was available to clinicians regarding blood pressure levels and risk. 
We note that in the past, not all physicians had equipment for blood pressure mea-
surement, nor knowledge of correctly measuring blood pressure.
To fully understand historical attitudes, we will briefly review the development 
of blood pressure measuring and the difficulties encountered in determining prehy-
pertensive and hypertensive levels.
Sodium restriction was advocated after the role of sodium in hypertension was 
demonstrated in 1904, and the rice diet of Kempner was popularized in the early 
1940s. Sodium thiocyanate was the first chemical substance to be used in the treat-
ment of hypertension, by Treupel and Edinger in 1900, and later by Hines at the 
Mayo clinic; it was potentially toxic, side effects were many, and it subsequently 
became unpopular.
In 1978 the WHO defined hypertension as blood pressure levels above 
160/95 mmHg, and normotension as levels less than 140/90 mmHg. Blood pressure 
levels between these two cutoff values were defined as borderline hypertension [23].
Many experts have defined borderline hypertension as intermittent blood pres-
sure levels above 150 mmHg systolic or 90 mmHg diastolic pressure [24]. The 
Ann Arbor group previously defined borderline hypertension as at least one dia-
stolic measurement below 90 mmHg diastolic among five blood pressure mea-
surements [25]. Since arterial pressure increases with age, these definitions have 
their limitations. Thus, many investigators have defined target blood pressure 
ranges according to age groups. Such definition disregards the presence or absence 
of end-organ damage. In addition, transient elevations in blood pressure have 
raised debate as to whether these are sufficient to classify a person with borderline 
hypertension. Moreover, different terminologies have been used, such as the term 
“labile hypertension,” which implies increased blood pressure variability. 
Furthermore, several studies have demonstrated a lack of correlation between the 
absolute level of blood pressure and its variability. Blood pressure has been shown 
to fluctuate in normotensive individuals also. Considering the above, it is not sur -
prising that excessive variability of blood pressure has never been established as 
a feature of borderline hypertension [25]. The five highest and five lowest blood 
pressure measurements during a 24 h recording were shown not to correlate to 
cardiovascular morbidity, while average blood pressure levels carry with them 
important predictive power [26].
R. Zimlichman et al.23
The term prehypertension signifies a condition that most always leads to hyper -
tension. Thus, this diagnosis indicates increased risk of cardiovascular morbidity 
and mortality. Patients should be informed of their condition, and encouraged to 
make every effort to change their destiny, by adopting measures that will lower 
blood pressure and protect them from developing hypertension.
Over the years, the definition of hypertension has changed quite frequently and 
the definition of prehypertension has changed accordingly. The recent AHA 2017 
definition actually added the 130–140/80–90 mmHg range, which was previously 
classified as prehypertension, to the hypertensive range, with the diagnostic and 
therapeutic implications of such [22]. Defining the limits of prehypertension and 
hypertension is problematic since there is no dispute that arterial pressure is a con-
tinuous variable and when converted to a logarithmic scale is Gaussian in shape.
The most recent definition of the AHA will likely be disputed by many, and prob-
ably by the upcoming guidelines of the European Society of Hypertension, which 
are currently being finalized. Nonetheless, as mentioned, the courageous definition 
of the ACC/AHA is not new. In 1930, this was the definition stated by Dr. Lewellys 
S. Barker of Johns Hopkins University [16]. Dr. Barker stated that “In adults, sys-
tolic blood pressure about 140 mm in the male and above 130 in the female, when 
it is more than transitory from physical exertion or emotional excitement, is looked 
upon as a pathological increase.”
Since blood pressure measuring was deemed compulsory in all insurance policies, 
huge amounts of data about blood pressure levels and outcomes have accumulated. 
The average blood pressure of all adults of all ages has been found in life insurance 
examinations to be 127 mm systolic and 83.5 mm diastolic [16]. From outcome insur -
ance information, the lowest mortality was shown in persons with levels somewhat 
lower than the average. Sir Thomas Lewis stated in 1933 that in healthy individuals, a 
blood pressure level below average is an asset, from the standpoint of longevity. Due 
to the very high relevance of blood pressure level to predicting morbidity and mortal-
ity, insurance companies established tables of mean blood pressure measurements 
according to age groups and their correlation to health and survival outcomes.
The increase in average blood pressure with age is well known, as is the correla-
tion of average blood pressure at various age groups with life expectancy. However, 
based on insurance company data, if blood pressure remains stable for 20, or even 
15 years, then at age 60 years, our prospect for a longer life will be correspondingly 
increased [16].
Blood pressure reduction was not always considered beneficial. The body build 
and blood pressure study, performed by the US Society of Actuaries in 1939, showed 
that among persons with diastolic blood pressure of 88–92 mmHg, mortality was 
100% above the average risk for the population. Thus, they concluded that blood 
pressure lowering may be advantageous [27]. However, during those years (the 
early 1940s) the prevailing concept of essential hypertension was that blood pres-
sure elevation was essential to perfusion of various organs. An increase in blood 
pressure was considered a compensatory reflex regulation to preserve tissue perfu-
sion. Thus, interfering with this reflex was considered as impairing tissue perfusion 
and to be potentially deleterious [28].2 History of Prehypertension: Past and Present24
The use of ganglion blockers caused several problems. A search was under -
taken for patients with stable, severe hypertension for treatment. Treatment of 
severe hypertension with those “toxic” drugs was limited to patients with “true” 
hypertension. Patients with labile hypertension were not considered for this treat-
ment because they did not have “established” hypertension [29]. They were 
assumed to have excessive blood pressure variability, a statement that was never 
proven. In 1945, Levy et al. showed that transient hypertension predicts future 
established hypertension with end-organ damage and the development of cardio-
vascular events [29].
Another problematic matter regarding the treatment of hypertension during the 
middle of the last century was the idea that patients with labile hypertension were 
only “nervous” and that tachycardia is a good marker for their nervousness. It is 
evident today, as it was in the past, that prehypertension and tachycardia are strong 
predictors of negative outcomes and that they are present in a large proportion of the 
population.
In recent years three major studies evaluated the benefit of treating patients with 
blood pressure in the prehypertensive range. The TROPHY trial [18] was designed 
to investigate whether pharmacologic treatment of prehypertension prevents or 
postpones stage 1 hypertension. Individuals with systolic blood pressure of 130–
159 and diastolic blood pressure of 85–90 mmHg were randomized to 2-year treat-
ment with candesartan or a placebo, followed by 2 years of treatment of a placebo 
to both groups. When participants reached hypertension, antihypertensive treatment 
was initiated. After 4  years, hypertension occurred less in the treatment group. 
Treatment during 2 of the 4 follow-up years resulted in a lower incidence of hyper -
tension [18, 30].
The ACCORD study aimed to determine the target range of blood pressure. A 
total of 4753 diabetic patients were randomized to two groups. One group was 
treated with standard therapy that targeted systolic pressure to levels of 140 mmHg 
and below, while in the second group, blood pressure levels were targeted to less 
than 120 mmHg. The mean follow-up period in both groups was 4.7 years. The find-
ings of the study showed that for patients with type 2 diabetes at high risk for car -
diovascular events, targeting a systolic blood pressure of less than 120  mmHg 
compared to less than 140 mmHg did not reduce the rate of the composite outcome 
of fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular events [20].
The SPRINT study [21] also aimed to identify the most appropriate target range 
of systolic blood pressure to reduce cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, albeit 
in a larger sample (9361 persons) than the ACCORD study, and among persons 
without diabetes [21]. The results showed that among persons with systolic blood 
pressure of 130 mmHg or higher, and with elevated cardiovascular risk but without 
diabetes, targeting a systolic blood pressure of less than 120 mmHg, compared with 
less than 140 mmHg, yielded lower rates of fatal and nonfatal major cardiovascular 
events and death from any cause, although significantly higher rates of some adverse 
events were observed in the intensive treatment groups [21].
In summary: About 100  years ago, elevated blood pressure was considered a 
natural compensatory phenomenon that preserved tissue perfusion. However, 
R. Zimlichman et al.25
clinical evidence and research subsequently proved otherwise: elevated blood pres-
sure has become recognized as a cardiovascular risk factor, and treatment of hyper -
tension has been shown to reduce cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.
Several erroneous concepts have hindered the understanding of the development 
of hypertension and its progression through the stage of prehypertension. Only after 
many years did physicians finally recognize the importance of tachycardia, which 
had been interpreted as a sign of “nervousness.” The importance of this marker, 
which implies sympathetic activation that leads to the development of hypertension, 
was ignored. Another wrong concept was the notion of “labile” versus “established” 
hypertension, which led to the idea that hypertension is due to overreaction to stress 
and that repeated episodes of elevated blood pressure are markers of the future 
development of established hypertension.
Since cardiovascular risk is greater in patients with severe hypertension than 
prehypertension, during a time period in which only limited therapeutic options 
were available, and such options were associated with substantial side effects, it was 
only natural that the main effort of “salvage of end organs” from hypertension 
focused on patients with severe and established hypertension. However, with the 
emergence of effective medications with minimal side effects, addressing prehyper -
tension is recognized as important and feasible, for the prevention of future cardio-
vascular disease.
References
 1. Levy RL, White PD, Stroud WD. Transient tachycardia. Prognostic significance alone and in 
association with transient hypertension. JAMA. 1945;129(9):585–8.
 2. Huang Y , Wang S, Cai X, et al. Prehypertension and incidence of cardiovascular disease: a 
meta-analysis. BMC Med. 2013;11:177.
 3. Ruskin A. Classics in arterial hypertension. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas; 1956.
 4. Freis ED. Origins and development of antihypertensive treatment. In: Laragh JH, Brenner BM, 
editors. Hypertension: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management. New York: Raven Press; 
1990. p. 2093–4.
 5. Hippocrates. Genuine works of Hippocrates, translated by Adams F.  London: Sydenham 
Society; 1949.
 6. Galen C.  Introduction in Pulsus ad teuthram, interpreted by Gregory M.  London: Guliel 
Rovillius; 1959.
 7. Final Report of the Subcommittee on Definition and Prevalence of the 1984 Joint National 
Committee. Hypertension prevalence and the status of awareness, treatment and control in the 
United States. Hypertension. 1985;7:457–68.
 8. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. For the Joint National Committee. The seventh 
report of the joint National Committee Report on prehypertension detection, evaluation and 
treatment of high blood pressure. The JNC VII report. JAMA. 2003;289:2560–72.
 9. Esunge PM.  From blood pressure to hypertension: the history of research. J R Soc Med. 
1991;84:621.
 10. Dustan HP, Schneckloth RE, Corcoran AC, Page IH. The effectiveness of long-term treatment 
of malignant hypertension. Circulation. 1958;18(4 Part 1):644–51.
 11. Veterans Administration Cooperative Study Group on Antihypertensive Agents. Effects of 
treatment on morbidity and mortality in hypertension: I.  Results in patients with diastolic 
blood pressure averaging 115–129 mmHg. JAMA. 1967;202:116–22.2 History of Prehypertension: Past and Present26
 12. Murphy EA.  The normal and the perils of sylleptic argument. Perspect Biol Med. 
1972;15:566–82.
 13. Freitag MH, Vasan RS.  What is normal blood pressure? Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 
2003;12:285–92.
 14. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizibash N, et al. Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to 
vascular mortality. Lancet. 2002;360:1903–13.
 15. Chobanian A V .  Guidelines for the management of hypertension. Med Clin N Am. 
2017;101:219–27.
 16. Livingston JM. Blood pressure, normal and abnormal. Can Med Assoc J. 1934;30(1):54–7.
 17. Folkov B. Physiological aspects of primary hypertension. Physiol Rev. 1982;62:347–504.
 18. Julius S, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, et al. For the trial of preventing hypertension (TROPHY) Study 
Investigators. Feasibility of treating prehypertension with an angiotensin receptor blocker. N 
Engl J Med. 2006;354:1685–97.
 19. Luders S, Schrader J, Berger J, et al. PHARAO Study Group. The PHARAO study: preven-
tion of hypertension with the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor ramipril in patients 
with high-normal blood pressure: a prospective, randomized controlled prevention trial of the 
German Hypertension League. J Hypertens. 2008:26:1487–96.
 20. The ACCORD Study Group. Effect of intensive blood pressure control in type 2 diabetes mel-
litus. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1575–85.
 21. The SPRINT Research Group. A randomized trial of intensive versus standard blood pressure 
control. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:2103–16.
 22. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronov WS, et al. ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APHA/ASH/ 
ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guidelines for the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation and Management of 
High blood Pressure in Adults: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension, Published online 
November 13, 2017. http://hyper.Ahajonrnals.Org/early/2017/11/10hgp.0000000000000066.
 23. The 1984 report of the Joint National Committee on Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of 
high blood pressure. Arch Intern Med. 1984;144:1045–57.
 24. World Health Organization: Report of a WHO Expert committee. Arterial hypertension. WHO 
Techn Rep Ser, 628; 1978.
 25. Takeshita A, Mark AL.  Decreased venous distensibility in borderline hypertension. 
Hypertension. 1979;1:202.
 26. Julius S, Hanson L, Andrew L, Gnbrandsson T, Sivertsson R, Svensson A. Borderline hyper -
tension. Acta Med Scand. 1980;208:481–9.
 27. Body build and blood pressure study—US Society of Actuaries 1939.
 28. Hay J. The significance of a raised blood pressure. Br Med J. 1931;3679:43–7.
 29. Levy RL, White PD, Stroud WD, Hillman CC.  Transient tachycardia. JAMA. 
1945;129(9):585–60.
 30. Julius S, Kacirot N, Egan BM, Nesbitt S, Michelson EL. For the trial of prevention of hyperten-
sion (TROPHY) Investigators. TROPHY study: outcomes based on the seventh report of the 
Joint National Committee on Hypertension definition of hypertension. J Am Soc Hypertens. 
2008;2(1):39–43.
R. Zimlichman et al.27 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_3
K. Stolarz-Skrzypek ( *) · D. Czarnecka 
First Department of Cardiology, Interventional Electrocardiology and Hypertension, 
Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland
e-mail: katarzyna.stolarz-skrzypek@uj.edu.pl3Parental History of Hypertension 
as the Determinant of Cardiovascular 
Function
Katarzyna Stolarz-Skrzypek and Danuta Czarnecka
Parents’ health influences the overall, including cardiovascular, health of their off-
spring, and the effect of a genetic basis and positive family history exists in the 
development of cardiometabolic risk in children [1]. Offspring usually imitate the 
unhealthy lifestyle habits of their parents, such as an unbalanced diet, smoking, and 
physical inactivity, and such shared family habits can also lead to an increased risk 
for cardiometabolic diseases.
Determination of blood pressure in related and unrelated individuals in a 
Tecumseh community and calculation of heritability have suggested that genetic 
components and shared household environment contribute to familial aggregation 
of blood pressure elevation [2]. Blood pressure correlation between parents and 
biological offspring (r = 0.32 for systolic and r = 0.37 for diastolic blood pressure) 
was significantly closer than that between parents and adopted offspring (r = 0.09 
and r = 0.10, respectively, for systolic and diastolic blood pressure) [3].
In the European Project on Genes in Hypertension (EPOGH) the investiga-
tors reported high heritability of various other cardiovascular phenotypes, 
including left ventricular mass [4 ], left ventricular diastolic function [5 ], and 
vascular properties [6 ].
In the recent years, the number of evidence has been accumulated that the unfa-
vorable change in the cardiovascular structure and function precede the develop-
ment of hypertension among the offspring of hypertensive parents.28
3.1  Blood Pressure
Associations of parental hypertension with blood pressure elevation in offspring 
have been indicated by number of cross-sectional studies.
Subjects with a family history of parental hypertension are reported to have a 
slightly higher office blood pressure in the prehypertensive stage [7].
In an early study by Parati et al., normotensive subjects with both parents hyper -
tensive were characterized by a significant although mild increase in their blood 
pressure values recorded either at rest and in ambulatory conditions over the 24 h, 
including night sleep, as compared to normotensive subjects with one parent hyper -
tensive or normotensive subjects with no parental hypertension [8].
In a cross-sectional sample of 217 men and 196 women, selected from the gen-
eral Caucasian population of Rochester, Minnesota, in the multivariate analyses, 
paternal but not maternal history of hypertension contributed to the probability of 
having hypertension in men. Neither paternal nor maternal history of hypertension 
made a statistically significant contribution to the probability of having hyperten-
sion in women [9].
Overwhelming evidence has been recently provided by the longitudinal studies.
In a study by Burke et al., by the time offspring were aged 9 years, systolic blood 
pressure was significantly higher in sons and daughters of hypertensive fathers than 
it was in sons and daughters of normotensive fathers. When they were aged 18 years, 
paternal hypertension predicted blood pressures in men and women independently 
of their weight at birth, fitness, alcohol consumption and weight for height for age. 
Systolic blood pressures increased more rapidly (by 0.6 mmHg/year) in men with 
hypertensive fathers [10].
Van den Elzen et al. examined the relationship between natural history of blood 
pressure in children aged 5–19 years and level of blood pressure in their parents. 
Cardiovascular risk factors were measured annually from 1975 through 2002. 
Repeated blood pressure measurements were studied as a function of tertiles of 
age- adjusted blood pressure measured in their parents at baseline. They found that 
systolic blood pressure was consistently higher by 2.7 mmHg from the age of 
5 years to the age of 40 years in subjects with parents in the highest tertile of sys-
tolic blood pressure, whereas such a parallel shift was not observed for diastolic 
blood pressure [11].
Wang et al. recruited university students, but they used only data from white men 
in their analysis. The blood pressure–age relationship within the age range of 
20–80 years was shifted upward by ≈2 mmHg in subjects with a parental history of 
hypertension compared with that in subjects without a parental history [12].
The effects of parental hypertension on longitudinal trends of blood pressure 
were examined in 2607 subjects (1095 men and 1512 women) who participated in 
the Tanno-Sobetsu Study from 1977 to 2006. In both men and women with and 
without parental hypertension, systolic blood pressure increased from the third to 
eighth decades of life, whereas diastolic blood pressure followed biphasic (inverted 
U shape) time course during that period. However, the relationships between the 
parameters and age were significantly shifted upward (by ≈5.3 mm Hg in systolic 
K. Stolarz-Skrzypek and D. Czarnecka29
blood pressure, 2.8 mmHg in diastolic blood pressure) in the group with parental 
hypertension compared with those in the group without parental hypertension. Both 
paternal and maternal histories of hypertension were determinants of systolic blood 
pressure and diastolic blood pressure, and there was no significant interaction 
between the sides of parental history [13].
3.2  Heart and Vessels
Available evidence is relatively small with regard to morphological and functional 
changes in the left ventricle in subjects with positive family history of 
hypertension.
In the Strong Heart Study there was shown a significantly higher thickness of 
intraventricular septum and left ventricular mass in adolescents and young adults 
with normal and high normal blood pressure compared to individuals with optimal 
blood pressure [14].
In the case–control study of normotensive men with positive family history of 
hypertension and their counterparts without such family history, parental hyperten-
sion was independently associated with higher left ventricular relative wall thick-
ness, an early index of concentric remodeling [15].
Furthermore, Grandi et al. showed that normotensive young adults with high 
genetic risk for hypertension (two parents hypertensive) have higher blood pres-
sure and thicker and overactive left ventricle as compared to subjects with normo-
tensive parents. Handgrip stimulated left ventricular function in offspring of 
normotensives, but not the already hyperkinetic left ventricle of offspring of 
hypertensive parents [16].
Moreover, in the Hypertension Genetic Epidemiologic Network (HyperGEN) it 
was shown that in this large, population-based cohort of nonhypertensive offspring 
of hypertensive parents, ethnic differences in hemodynamic and echocardiographic 
profiles exist. Nonhypertensive African American offspring had more abnormalities 
in left ventricular function than their white counterparts. The authors postulated that 
these abnormalities may be a precursor of the observed earlier appearance of cardio-
vascular disease in African Americans compared with whites [17].
In the study by Zizek et al., in normotensive individuals with family history of 
hypertension, left ventricular morphological and functional changes were found. 
Offspring of hypertensive families had higher left ventricular mass index and worse 
left ventricular diastolic function than control subjects (lower E/A ratio, lower E(m) 
and E(m)/A(m) ratio). Moreover, it was demonstrated that an increase in left ven-
tricular mass and alterations in left ventricular diastolic function are related to endo-
thelial dysfunction [18].
Among individuals recruited for the Bergen Blood Pressure Study, offspring of 
hypertensive families had lower transmitral early/late peak flow velocities and 
higher transmitral late peak flow velocities than offspring of normotensive families, 
but the differences between groups became inconsistent after adjustment for con-
founding variables (including left ventricular structural parameters). On the other 3 Parental History of Hypertension as the Determinant of Cardiovascular Function30
hand, the family history of hypertension was consistently associated with increased 
transmitral early peak flow velocity and increased transmitral acceleration and 
deceleration slopes, a pattern suggesting increased left ventricular stiffness [19].
Increased carotid intima-media thickness is considered as an early and valuable 
cardiovascular risk marker. However, information about the impact of the family 
burden of hypertension on the remodeling of large vessels in young healthy people 
are limited.
In the study by Cuomo et al., carried out in 29 participants with parental history 
of hypertension, higher values of carotid intima-media thickness were found com-
pared to offspring of normotensive parents, also after accounting for blood pressure, 
body mass index, smoking, lipid levels, apolipoproteins, and lipoprotein (a) [20].
In offspring aged 14–30  years, central augmentation index assessed with 
SphygmoCor device was significantly higher in subjects with at least one hyperten-
sive parent, after adjusting for sex, age, body mass index, heart rate, smoking ciga-
rettes, total serum cholesterol, and C-reactive protein [21].
Augmentation index, but not brachial pulse wave velocity, was reported as sig-
nificantly higher in middle-aged offspring of hypertensive parents compared with 
control subjects [22].
Rajzer et  al. in a group of 70 young adults with normal blood pressure after 
accounting for confounding factors did not find any difference in carotid-femoral 
pulse wave velocity in relation to family history of hypertension [23].
In a case–control study of 67 normotensive children whose parents had a diagno-
sis of essential hypertension and 39 normotensive children with no parental history 
of hypertension, carotid intima-media thickness were significantly different in the 
study group compared with the control group among all age groups. Aortic systolic 
and diastolic diameters were larger in normotensive children of hypertensive par -
ents compared with the control group [24].
In the EPOGH cohort, normotensive offspring who had at least one hypertensive 
parent as compared to normotensive offspring of two normotensive parents had 
higher central augmentation index and pulse wave velocity. However, complex 
adjustment including mean arterial pressure and age removed the differences 
between the offspring in the measures of arterial stiffness [6].
In a sample of 1564 nonhypertensive Framingham Heart Study third-generation 
cohort participants (mean age: 38 years; 55% women) whose parents were enrolled 
in the Framingham Offspring Study, parental hypertension was associated with 
greater offspring mean arterial pressure and with greater forward pressure wave 
amplitude. Carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity and augmentation index displayed 
similar dose-dependent relations with parental hypertension in sex-, age-, and 
height-adjusted models, but associations were attenuated on further adjustment. 
Offspring with at least one parent in the upper quartile of augmentation index and 
carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity had significantly higher values themselves. 
These observations are consistent with higher vascular stiffness at an early stage in 
the pathogenesis of hypertension [25].
Gopinath et al. showed that a positive parental history of hypertension in healthy 
prepubertal girls, but not boys, is associated with narrower retinal arteriolar vessels, 
likely conveying a predisposition to develop hypertension later in life [26].
K. Stolarz-Skrzypek and D. Czarnecka31
3.3  Biochemical Disturbances and Life Style
Accumulating epidemiological studies have shown that healthy offspring of hyper -
tensive patients exhibit some metabolic disturbances such as hyperinsulinemia, 
insulin resistance, lipid disorders, elevated plasma leptin levels, and reduced insulin 
receptor number, features that may be predictors of future cardiovascular events.
A Japanese study showed that a maternal history of hypertension was signifi-
cantly associated with the risk of overweight in children [27].
Normotensive adolescent offspring with hypertensive parents were found to have 
significantly higher serum insulin levels, which indicates that insulin resistance pre-
cedes the onset of clinical hypertension in persons genetically predisposed to hyper -
tension [28].
Over 10 years of follow-up of 557 young, nonobese Japanese men who were 
normotensive at entry, development of hyperinsulinemia was more pronounced in 
the subjects with a positive family history of hypertension [29].
Furuhashi et al. observed that plasma level of adiponectin, a biomarker correlat-
ing with insulin sensitivity, was lower in young men with a parental history of 
hypertension [30].
Moreover, it was demonstrated that number of insulin receptors is reduced in the 
erythrocytes of healthy offspring of hypertensive patients in comparison to the off-
spring of healthy normotensive subjects [31].
Papadopoulos et al. showed that insulin and resistin plasma levels were signifi-
cantly higher, while adiponectin levels were significantly lower in 18  years old 
healthy offspring of patients with essential hypertension-positive family history 
[32].
A recent study in 554 Korean adolescents aged 13–19 years showed that a paren-
tal history of hypertension indicates a greater risk for elevated alanine transaminase 
(ALT) in teenagers, suggestive of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) [33].
In the long-term observation of the Bogalusa Heart Study, the offspring of hyper -
tensive parents displayed overweight regardless of age, higher levels of blood pres-
sure after age 10 years, and elevations of triglycerides and VLDL cholesterol after 
age 24 years irrespective of weight [34].
Some groups also reported elevated total serum cholesterol [35] and higher 
serum glucose [36] in offspring of hypertensive as compared to offspring of normo-
tensive parents.
In the Odense Schoolchild Study, children aged 8–10 years with a parental his-
tory of hypertension displayed a significant decrease in physical fitness and a sig-
nificant increase in obesity and systolic and diastolic blood pressure compared with 
the rest of the population. After controlling for differences in body size and physical 
fitness, they also showed significantly higher levels of systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure [37].
Shook et al. studied fitness and incident hypertension in 6278 participants who 
were given a preventative medical examination. Thirty-three percent reported a par -
ent with hypertension, and there were 1545 cases of incident hypertension after a 
mean of 4.7 years. Individuals with both a low level of fitness and a parent with 
hypertension exhibited a 70% higher risk for developing hypertension compared 3 Parental History of Hypertension as the Determinant of Cardiovascular Function32
with high-fit individuals with no parental history. However, individuals with a high 
level of fitness and a parent with hypertension only experienced a 16% higher risk 
of developing hypertension compared with fit individuals with no parental history. 
This significantly lower risk of developing hypertension when progressing from 
low- to high-fit groups among those with a parental history of hypertension has 
important clinical implications [38].
3.4  Cardiovascular Regulation
To investigate whether parental hypertension affects children’s cardiovascular reac-
tivity over time, a longitudinal study of 315 students was conducted in the public 
schools of Obion County, Tennessee. The CVR task was a series of video games 
(taking approximately 10 min to play) given to the same students in their third-, 
fourth-, fifth-, seventh-, and eighth-grade years. Cardiovascular reactivity was 
defined as the change in blood pressure or heart rate between before playing and 
while playing the video game. Increased cardiovascular reactivity was observed in 
children with parental hypertension compared with children without parental hyper -
tension but was statistically significant only for systolic blood pressure after adjust-
ment for covariates [39].
Among 220 healthy men and women, aged 22–50 years, who completed two 
24 h ambulatory blood pressure monitoring sessions, women with two hypertensive 
parents and elevated norepinephrine levels had higher systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure during waking and sleep periods. In men the combination of two hyperten-
sive parents and high norepinephrine was related only to diastolic blood pressure 
during waking [40].
In a case–control study, Pitzalis et al. noticed a shorter resting RR interval and a 
blunted autonomic modulation of heart rate among offspring of hypertensive par -
ents [41]. In line with this case–control study, in a population-based family study we 
found among subjects with a positive family history of hypertension a shorter RR 
interval and a diminished regulation of autonomic balance upon standing [42].
3.5  Impact of Hypertensive Disorders of Pregnancy
An accumulating body of evidence suggests that offspring of mothers with pre-
eclampsia have higher blood pressure during childhood and young adulthood com-
pared with offspring of women without preeclampsia.
In the data for mother-offspring pairs from a United Kingdom prospective birth 
cohort (the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children), systolic and diastolic 
blood pressures were higher in offspring of mothers with gestational hypertension 
(mean difference, 2.06 mmHg) and preeclampsia (1.12 mmHg) compared with off-
spring of mothers without hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, adjusting for poten-
tial confounders (age, sex, maternal age at delivery, household social class, 
prepregnancy body mass index, parity, and smoking in pregnancy) [43].
K. Stolarz-Skrzypek and D. Czarnecka33
Also in a subsample of 2608 mother-offspring pairs followed for 21 years from 
an original cohort of 7223 singleton infants whose mothers gave birth in Brisbane, 
Australia, between 1981 and 1983, unadjusted regression analysis showed that off-
spring of women who experienced hypertensive disorder of pregnancy have 
3.46   mmHg greater systolic and 3.02  mmHg greater diastolic blood pressure at 
21  years. This association remained consistent after adjusting for potential con-
founding and mediating factors including offspring gender, age, percentile birth 
weight for gestation, placenta weight and body mass index at 21 year, maternal age, 
education, racial origin, and smoking during pregnancy and their prepregnancy 
body mass index [44].
Adolescent offspring exposed to maternal preeclampsia have greater relative 
wall thickness and reduced left ventricular end-diastolic volume, which could be 
early signs of concentric remodeling and affect future cardiac function as well as 
risk of cardiovascular disease [45].
According to the recent meta-analysis, maternal hypertensive disorders do 
appear to be associated with adverse changes in cardiovascular risk in adult off-
spring, including raised body mass index, overweight and obesity and higher blood 
pressure. These findings are consistent with those from studies of offspring child-
hood and early adulthood. This supports the hypothesis that the offspring of women 
with hypertensive disorders in pregnancy have a risk of clinical cardiometabolic 
events later in life, including hypertension and stroke [46].
 Conclusion
Evaluating the history of parental hypertension could be helpful in predicting 
offspring with a higher risk of developing cardiometabolic diseases, even in the 
preclinical stage. The collection of parental history of hypertension should also 
include the information concerning hypertensive disorders of pregnancy in the 
mother.
Offspring of hypertensive parents are characterized by elevated blood pres-
sure, alterations in cardiac and arterial structure and function, and biochemical 
disturbances, even before the development of sustained hypertension. Therefore, 
preventive measures of and early intervention for cardiometabolic risk in indi-
viduals with parental hypertension should be reinforced, with particular attention 
towards offspring of both hypertensive parents.
References
 1. Steinberger J, Daniels SR.  American Heart Association Atherosclerosis, Hypertension, 
and Obesity in the Young Committee (Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young); 
American Heart Association Diabetes Committee (Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, 
and Metabolism). Circulation. 2003;107(10):1448–53.
 2. Longini IM Jr, Higgins MW, Hinton PC, Moll PP, Keller JB.  Environmental and genetic 
sources of familial aggregation of blood pressure in Tecumseh, Michigan. Am J Epidemiol. 
1984;120:131–44.
 3. Biron P, Mongeau JG, Bertrand D.  Familial aggregation of blood pressure in 558 adopted 
children. Can Med Assoc J. 1976;115:773–4.3 Parental History of Hypertension as the Determinant of Cardiovascular Function34
 4. Kuznetsova T, Staessen JA, Olszanecka A, Ryabikov A, Stolarz K, Malyutina S, Fagard 
R, Kawecka-Jaszcz K, Nikitin Y .  European Project on Genes in Hypertension (EPOGH) 
Investigators. Maternal and paternal influences on left ventricular mass of offspring. 
Hypertension. 2003;41(1):69–74.
 5. Kloch-Badelek M, Knez J, Tikhonoff V , Thijs L, Sakiewicz W, Ryabikov A, Stolarz-Skrzypek 
K, Jin Y , Malyutina S, Casiglia E, Narkiewicz K, Czarnecka D, Kawecka-Jaszcz K, Staessen 
JA, Kuznetsova T.  European Project on Genes in Hypertension (EPOGH) Investigators. 
Heritability and other determinants of left ventricular diastolic function in the family-based 
population study. J Hypertens. 2014;32(9):1854–61.
 6. Kucerová J, Filipovský J, Staessen JA, Cwynar M, Wojciechowska W, Stolarz K, Kuznetsova 
T, Gasowski J, Dolejsová M, Grodzicki T, Kawecka-Jaszcz K, Fagard R. Arterial character -
istics in normotensive offspring of parents with or without a history of hypertension. Am J 
Hypertens. 2006;19(3):264–9.
 7. Ravogli A, Trazzi S, Villani A, Mutti E, Cuspidi C, Sampieri L, De Ambroggi L, Parati G, 
Zanchetti A, Mancia G. Early 24-hour blood pressure elevation in normotensive subjects with 
parental hypertension. Hypertension. 1990;16:491–7.
 8. Parati G, Ravogli A, Giannattasio C, et al. Changes in 24 hour blood pressure and in car -
diac and vascular structure in normotensive subjects with parental hypertension. Clin Exp 
Hypertens A. 1992;14:67–83.
 9. Rebbeck TR, Turner ST, Sing CF. Probability of having hypertension: effects of sex, history of 
hypertension in parents, and other risk factors. J Clin Epidemiol. 1996;49:727–34.
 10. Burke V , Gracey MP, Beilin LJ, Milligan RA. Family history as a predictor of blood pressure 
in a longitudinal study of Australian children. J Hypertens. 1998;16:269–76.
 11. van den Elzen AP, de Ridder MA, Grobbee DE, Hofman A, Witteman JC, Uiterwaal 
CS.  Families and the natural history of blood pressure: a 27-year follow-up study. Am J 
Hypertens. 2004;17:936–40.
 12. Wang NY , Young JH, Meoni LA, Ford DE, Erlinger TP, Klag MJ.  Blood pressure change 
and risk of hypertension associated with parental hypertension: the Johns Hopkins Precursors 
Study. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168:643–8.
 13. Mitsumata K, Saitoh S, Ohnishi H, Akasaka H, Miura T.  Effects of parental hypertension 
on longitudinal trends in blood pressure and plasma metabolic profile: mixed-effects model 
analysis. Hypertension. 2012 Nov;60(5):1124–30.
 14. Drukteinis JS, Roman MJ, Fabsitz RR, Lee ET, Best LG, Russell M, Devereux RB. Cardiac 
and systemic hemodynamic characteristics of hypertension and prehypertension in adolescents 
and young adults: the Strong Heart Study. Circulation. 2007;115:221–7.
 15. Pelà G, Pattoneri P, Passera M, Li Calzi M, Goldoni M, Tirabassi G, Montanari A. Normotensive 
male offspring of essential hypertensive parents show early changes in left ventricular geom-
etry independent of blood pressure. Echocardiography. 2011;28(8):821–8.
 16. Grandi AM, Poletti L, Tettamanti F, Finardi G, Venco A. Left ventricular anatomy and function 
in normotensive young adults with hypertensive parents. Study at rest and during handgrip. 
Am J Hypertens. 1995;8:154–9.
 17. Glasser SP, Lynch AI, Devereux RB, Hopkins P, Arnett DK. Hemodynamic and echocardio-
graphic profiles in African American compared with White offspring of hypertensive parents: 
the HyperGEN study. Am J Hypertens. 2014;27(1):21–6.
 18. Zizek B, Poredos P. Increased left ventricular mass and diastolic dysfunction are associated 
with endothelial dysfunction in normotensive offspring of subjects with essential hyperten-
sion. Blood Press. 2007;16(1):36–44.
 19. Mo R, Nordrehaug JE, Omvik P, Lund-Johansen P. The Bergen Blood Pressure Study: pre-
hypertensive changes in cardiac structure and function in offspring of hypertensive families. 
Blood Press. 1995;4:16–22.
 20. Cuomo S, Gaeta G, Guarini P, et al. Increased carotid intima-media thickness in healthy young 
subjects with a parental history of hypertension (parental hypertension and vascular health). 
Heart. 2007;93:368–9.
K. Stolarz-Skrzypek and D. Czarnecka35
 21. Kyvelou SM, Vyssoulis GP, Karpanou EA, Adamopoulos DN, Deligeorgis AD, Cokkinos 
DV , Stefanadis CI. Arterial stiffness in offspring of hypertensive parents: a pilot study. Int J 
Cardiol. 2007;129:438–40.
 22. Yasmin FR, Brown MJ. Determinants of arterial stiffness in offspring of families with essential 
hypertension. Am J Hypertens. 2004;17:292–8.
 23. Rajzer MW, Klocek M, Kawecka-Jaszcz K, Czarnecka D, Baran W, Dudek K, Petriczek 
T. Aortic pulse wave velocity in young normotensives with a family history of hypertension. J 
Hypertens. 1999;17:1821–4.
 24. Yildirim A, Kosger P, Ozdemir G, Sahin FM, Ucar B, Kilic Z. Carotid intima-media thickness 
and elastic properties of aortas in normotensive children of hypertensive parents. Hypertens 
Res. 2015 Sep;38(9):621–6.
 25. Andersson C, Quiroz R, Enserro D, Larson MG, Hamburg NM, Vita JA, Levy D, Benjamin EJ, 
Mitchell GF, Vasan RS. Association of parental hypertension with arterial stiffness in nonhy-
pertensive offspring: the Framingham Heart Study. Hypertension. 2016;68(3):584–9.
 26. Gopinath B, Baur LA, Hardy LL, Wang JJ, Teber E, Wong TY , Mitchell P. Parental history of 
hypertension is associated with narrower retinal arteriolar caliber in young girls. Hypertension. 
2011;58:425–30.
 27. Liu J, Sekine M, Tatsuse T, Hamanishi S, Fujimura Y , Zheng X. Family history of hypertension 
and the risk of overweight in Japanese children: results from the Toyama Birth Cohort Study. 
J Epidemiol. 2014;24(4):304–11.
 28. Grunfeld B, Balzareti M, Romo M, Gimenez M, Gutman R. Hyperinsulinemia in normoten-
sive offspring of hypertensive parents. Hypertension. 1994;23(1 Suppl):I12–5.
 29. Masuo K, Mikami H, Ogihara T, Tuck ML. Familial hypertension, insulin, sympathetic activ-
ity, and blood pressure elevation. Hypertension. 1998;32:96–100.
 30. Furuhashi M, Ura N, Higasiura K, Shimamoto K, Miyazaki Y , Murakami H, Hyakukoku 
M. Low adiponectin level in young normotensive men with a family history of essential hyper -
tension. Hypertens Res. 2005;28:141–6.
 31. Makris TA, Paizis I, Krespi PG, Stavroulakis GA, Papazachou OG, Papadopoulos DP, 
Hatzizacharias AN, V otteas VV . Insulin receptor number is reduced in healthy offspring of 
patients with essential hypertension. Am J Hypertens. 2004;17(10):911–4.
 32. Papadopoulos DP, Makris TK, Perrea D, Papazachou O, Daskalaki M, Sanidas E, V otteas 
V . Adiponectin—insulin and resistin plasma levels in young healthy offspring of patients with 
essential hypertension. Blood Press. 2008;17(1):50–4.
 33. Yoo JE, Park HS. Relationship between parental hypertension and cardiometabolic risk fac-
tors in adolescents. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2017;19:678. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jch.12991.
 34. Bao W, Srinivasan SR, Wattigney WA, Berenson GS. The relation of parental cardiovascular 
disease to risk factors in children and young adults. The Bogalusa Heart Study. Circulation. 
1995;91(2):365–71.
 35. Neutel JM, Smith DH, Graettinger WF, Winer RL, Weber MA. Heredity and hypertension: 
impact on metabolic characteristics. Am Heart J. 1992;124:435–40.
 36. Zizek B, Poredos P, Trojar A, Zeljko T. Diastolic dysfunction is associated with insulin resis-
tance, but not with aldosterone level in normotensive offspring of hypertensive families. 
Cardiology. 2008;111:8–15.
 37. Hansen HS, Nielsen JR, Hyldebrandt N, Froberg K. Blood pressure and cardiac structure in 
children with a parental history of hypertension: the Odense Schoolchild Study. J Hypertens. 
1992;10:677–82.
 38. Shook RP, Lee DC, Sui X, Prasad V , Hooker SP, Church TS, Blair SN. Cardiorespiratory fit-
ness reduces the risk of incident hypertension associated with a parental history of hyperten-
sion. Hypertension. 2012;59(6):1220–4.
 39. Li R, Alpert BS, Walker SS, Somes GW. Longitudinal relationship of parental hypertension 
with body mass index, blood pressure, and cardiovascular reactivity in children. J Pediatr. 
2007;150:498–502.3 Parental History of Hypertension as the Determinant of Cardiovascular Function36
 40. Goldstein IB, Shapiro D, Weiss RE. How family history and risk factors for hypertension relate 
to ambulatory blood pressure in healthy adults. J Hypertens. 2008;26:276–83.
 41. Pitzalis MV , Iacoviello M, Massari F, Guida P, Romito R, Forleo C. Influence of gender and 
family history of hypertension on autonomic control of heart rate, diastolic function and brain 
natriuretic peptide. J Hypertens. 2001;19:143–8.
 42. Stolarz K, Staessen JA, Kuznetsova T, Tikhonoff V , State D, Babeanu S, Casiglia E, Fagard 
RH, Kawecka-Jaszcz K, Nikitin Y .  European Project on Genes in Hypertension (EPOGH) 
Investigators. Host and environmental determinants of heart rate and heart rate variability in 
four European populations. J Hypertens. 2003;21(3):525–35.
 43. Fraser I, Nelson SM, MacDonald-Wallis C, Sattar N, Lawlor DA.  Hypertensive disor -
ders of pregnancy and cardiometabolic health in adolescent offspring. Hypertension. 
2013;62(3):614–20.
 44. Mamun AA, Kinarivala MK, O'Callaghan M, Williams G, Najman J, Callaway L. Does hyper -
tensive disorder of pregnancy predict offspring blood pressure at 21 years? Evidence from a 
birth cohort study. J Hum Hypertens. 2012;26(5):288–94.
 45. Timpka S, Macdonald-Wallis C, Hughes AD, Chaturvedi N, Franks PW, Lawlor DA, Fraser 
A. Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and offspring cardiac structure and function in adoles-
cence. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5(11):e003906.
 46. Thoulass JC, Robertson L, Denadai L, Black C, Crilly M, Iversen L, Scott NW, Hannaford 
PC.  Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and adult offspring cardiometabolic outcomes: a 
systematic review of the literature and meta-analysis. J Epidemiol Community Health. 
2016;70(4):414–22.
K. Stolarz-Skrzypek and D. Czarnecka37 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_4
M. Doumas · N. Katsiki 
Second Propedeutic Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School,  
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Hippocration Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece 
D. P. Mikhailidis ( *) 
Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Royal Free Hospital Campus,  
University College London Medical School, University College London (UCL), London, UK4Prehypertension, the Risk 
of Hypertension and Events
Michael Doumas, Niki Katsiki, and Dimitri P . Mikhailidis
Highlights
• Prehypertension is a precursor of hypertension in a high proportion of 
individuals.
• Several factors may predispose to the development of prehypertension including 
uric acid, dietary salt intake, arterial stiffness, autonomic imbalance, obesity, and 
subclinical inflammation.
• Progression of prehypertension to hypertension has been associated with visceral 
abdominal fat, sympathetic overactivity, sympathovagal imbalance, endothelial 
dysfunction, impairment of coronary flow reserve, and metabolic syndrome. 
Age, gender, ethnicity, and baseline blood pressure may also affect the incidence 
of hypertension.
• Prehypertension is associated with increased risk for coronary heart disease, 
stroke, chronic kidney disease, and cardiovascular death, but not all-cause 
mortality.
• Lifestyle measures and antihypertensive drugs may delay or even prevent the 
progression of prehypertension to hypertension.38
4.1  Introduction
The concept of “predisease” was first used over a century ago, when a “precan-
cerous” state was described for several tumors, delineating the process from 
normal tissue morphology to neoplastic development [1 –3]. The aim of the 
“predisease” term was mainly to identify malignancies at an earlier asymptom-
atic stage in an effort to attenuate the progression to overt disease through spe-
cific intervention.
The term “prehypertension” was first used by Robinson and Brucer in 1939 
[4]. In a landmark study of 10,883 men and women living in Chicago, they evalu-
ated a range of normal blood pressure (BP) and drew attention to a “danger zone” 
of BP at 120–139/80–89 mmHg. Participants with BP within this “danger zone” 
were designated as prehypertensive, stating that: “… there is a difference in the 
daily changing tensions of the vascular system in the healthy and in the prehyper -
tensive person” and “… about 40% of the adult population is prehypertensive or 
hypertensive” [4 ].
The term prehypertension did not gain wide recognition and was almost forgot-
ten for many decades until the Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on 
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC-7) 
re-introduced the term at 2003 [5]. According to the JNC-7 report: “... prehyperten-
sion is not a disease category. Rather it is a designation chosen to identify individu-
als at high risk of developing hypertension, so that both patients and clinicians are 
alerted to this risk and encouraged to intervene and prevent or delay the disease 
from developing” [5]. Prehypertension is defined as systolic BP (SBP) values 
between 120 and 139  mmHg and/or diastolic BP (DBP) values between 80 and 
89 mmHg. Prehypertension can be further categorized in stage I and stage II prehy-
pertension (120–129 and/or 80–84  mmHg and 130–139 and/or 85–89  mmHg, 
respectively).
The relationship between BP and future cardiovascular (CV) events is continu-
ous and graded [6]. Therefore, using a dichotomous approach (hypertension— 
normotension) or a trichotomous approach (hypertension—prehypertension— 
normotension) is arbitrary and can only be justified as the effort to draw the line for 
individuals who will benefit from an intervention. In order to use the “prehyperten-
sion” term as a clinically meaningful description of a group of individuals, three 
major requirements need to be fulfilled: (a) the risk of developing hypertension 
should be markedly higher in people with prehypertension compared with those 
without prehypertension, (b) the risk of future CV events should be substantially 
greater in prehypertensive compared with normotensive individuals, and (c) effec-
tive intervention (e.g., lifestyle modification or pharmacological therapy) should 
substantially reduce the detrimental consequences of prehypertension (the progres-
sion from prehypertension to hypertension and future CV events), with the benefits 
of intervention exceeding its harms.
This review aims to address and critically discuss the first two aspects: the pro-
gression from prehypertension to hypertension and the risk for future CV events 
conferred by prehypertension.
M. Doumas et al.39
4.2  Progression from Prehypertension to Hypertension
Hypertension is a progressive disease with constant BP elevation over time, mainly 
due to structural and functional alterations of the vasculature [7]. The Framingham 
study offered significant information on the residual lifetime risk for developing 
hypertension in middle-aged individuals. Among 1298 participants aged 
55–65 years, the residual lifetime risk for incident hypertension was 90% for both 
male and female participants, and for both 55- and 65-year-old participants at base-
line [8]. In other words, almost all of us will develop hypertension if we live long 
enough. The real question is whether all individuals with normal BP are at the same 
risk to develop hypertension or patients with higher BP values (prehypertension) are 
at increased risk for incident hypertension compared with lower BP (optimal BP). 
The landmark study by Robinson and Brucer was the first to report the impact of 
prehypertension on incident hypertension stating that “… men with moderately 
high systolic pressures (120–140 mmHg) at any age, but especially in the younger 
group, are probably the ones who will have hypertension years later,” and that pre-
hypertension “… is an almost infallible sign of incipient hypertension” [4]. The risk 
of progression from prehypertension to hypertension has been addressed in several 
studies. Relevant data comes from large longitudinal cohorts in various populations 
or the placebo arm of randomized studies.
The first longitudinal study that specifically addressed the progression from pre-
hypertension to hypertension was the Framingham study [9]. A total of 5209 men 
and women were followed for 26 years. The proportion of males who developed 
hypertension during the 26-year follow-up period was 70.6% in men with high- 
normal BP vs. only 33.2% in men with normal BP [relative risk (RR): 2.11; 95% 
confidence interval (CI): 1.81–2.50]. Similar differences were observed in females: 
77.7% of women with high-normal BP developed hypertension compared with only 
41.9% of women with normal BP (RR: 1.90; 95% CI: 1.60–2.30). Moreover, the 
age-adjusted RR for incident hypertension in participants with high-normal BP was 
3.36 for males and 3.37 for females. It has to be acknowledged, however, that the 
definitions of hypertension, prehypertension, and optimal BP were different than 
the ones currently used. In particular, hypertension diagnosis was based on DBP 
alone (>90 mmHg), prehypertension was defined as DBP 80–89 mmHg and SBP 
<140 mmHg, and normotension was defined as BP <140/85 mmHg. Therefore, the 
findings of the study are representative of stage II prehypertension compared with 
lower BP (stage I prehypertension and optimal BP).
An updated report of the Framingham study about a decade later overcame the 
definition problems [10]. Overall, 9845 individuals aged 35–94 years were eligible 
for analysis of a 4-year follow-up period. In total, progression to hypertension was 
twice as frequent in older than in younger participants (35 vs. 16%, respectively). In 
younger participants (35–64 years), progression to hypertension occurred in 37.4% 
of participants with stage II prehypertension (95% CI: 33.3–41.5%), 17.6% of par -
ticipants with stage I prehypertension (95% CI: 15.2–20.3%), and 5.3% of partici-
pants with optimal BP (95% CI: 4.4–6.3%). The corresponding 4-year rates of 
progression to hypertension in older participants (65–94 years) were 49.5% (95% 4 Prehypertension, the Risk of Hypertension and Events40
CI: 42.6–56.4%), 25.5% (95% CI: 20.4–31.4%), and 16% (12–20.9%). Compared 
with optimal BP, the odds ratios for stage II and stage I prehypertension were 11.6 
(95% CI: 9.6–14) and 4.1 (95% CI: 3.4–4.9), respectively, in younger participants, 
and 5.5 (95% CI: 3.4–4.9) and 2.0 (95% CI: 1.4–2.7), respectively, in older partici-
pants. The proportions of younger participants with stage II prehypertension who 
progressed to hypertension at 1, 2, and 3 years were 11.0, 20.8, and 29.6%, while 
the corresponding rates for participants with stage I prehypertension were 4.7, 9.2, 
and 13.5%, and for participants with optimal BP were 1.3, 2.7, and 4%. For older 
participants, the corresponding rates for stage II prehypertension were 15.7, 28.9, 
and 40.1%, for stage I prehypertension were 7.1, 13.7, and 19.8%, and for optimal 
BP were 4.3, 8.3, and 12.2%.
Another study included 2048 participants in two British Health and Lifestyle 
Surveys (HALS 1 and HALS 2) conducted 7 years apart [11]. Compared with par -
ticipants with optimal BP, participants with stage I prehypertension had a twofold 
higher risk of developing hypertension (RR: 2.0; 95% CI: 1.6–2.6), while partici-
pants with stage II prehypertension had an almost threefold higher risk for incident 
hypertension (RR: 2.9; 95% CI: 2.3–3.7). Binomial regression analysis revealed 
that the greater RR for progression to hypertension was observed in younger patients 
(35–44 years of age at baseline) with stage II prehypertension (RR: 4.4; 95% CI: 
3.0–6.3), and the lower RR was observed in older patients (65–74 years of age) with 
stage I prehypertension (RR: 1.4; 95% CI: 0.7–2.8).
A prospective cohort of 18,865 non-hypertensive individuals (African- 
Americans: 30.4% and Caucasians 69.6%) aged 18–85 years provides information 
about the impact of black race on the progression of prehypertension to hyperten-
sion [12]. Over a 7-year follow-up period, 63.8% of study participants developed 
hypertension. Compared with participants with optimal SBP, participants with stage 
I prehypertension were at an increased risk to develop hypertension [adjusted haz-
ard ratio (HR): 1.50; 95% CI: 1.42–1.58], which was further increased in partici-
pants with stage II prehypertension (adjusted HR: 1.75; 95% CI: 1.67–1.84). The 
corresponding HRs for DBP were 1.18 (95% CI: 1.13–1.24) for stage I and 1.21 
(95% CI: 1.15–1.28) for stage II prehypertension, respectively. Compared with 
Caucasian participants, African-Americans were at an increased risk for incident 
hypertension (adjusted HR: 1.35; 95% CI: 1.30–1.40). Of note, the median conver -
sion time (when half of participants developed hypertension) was 1 year shorter for 
African-Americans than Caucasians (626 vs. 991 days; p < 0.001).
Two prospective cohorts provide relevant information for Chinese individuals. 
A population-based sample of 10,525 non-hypertensive Chinese over 40 years of 
age was followed for a mean of 8.2 years [13]. Overall, 28.9% of male and 26.9% 
of female participants developed hypertension. The conversion rates were 37.6 
and 36.6% for prehypertensive men and women compared with 20.3 and 18.9% 
for normotensive men and women, respectively. Compared with participants with 
normal BP, participants with prehypertension were at a significantly higher risk 
for incident hypertension with a RR of 1.70 for men (95% CI: 1.53–1.88) and 1.64 
for women (95% CI: 1.46–1.83) [13]. Another population-based sample of 24,052 
rural non-hypertensive Chinese over 35 years of age was followed for a median of 
28 months [14]. Overall, hypertension developed in 32.4% of participants with 
M. Doumas et al.41
stage II prehypertension, 25.2% with stage I prehypertension, and 21.2% with 
optimal BP. Compared with participants with optimal BP, participants with stage 
I prehypertension were at an increased risk for incident hypertension (adjusted 
HR: 1.16; 95% CI: 1.08–1.24) and the risk was further increased in participants 
with stage II prehypertension (adjusted HR: 1.28; 95% CI: 1.20–1.36). Further 
analyses of this cohort identified predictors of progression (age, Mongolian eth-
nicity, obesity, lifestyle habits) [15] and revealed a higher incidence of conversion 
in men than in women (12.75 vs. 10.04 for 100 person-years, respectively) [16] 
and a similarity of progression predictors between prehypertensive and normoten-
sive individuals [17].
In a cohort of more than 12,000 non-hypertensive Japanese workers aged 
20–64  years that were followed from 1999 to 2008, hypertension developed in 
36.5% of study participants [18]. The rates of incident hypertension increased with 
age, from 23.1% in participants aged 35–49  years to 50.6% in participants over 
50  years of age. Compared with participants with optimal BP, participants with 
stage I and stage II prehypertension had a significantly increased risk for incident 
hypertension in all age groups (20–34, 35–49, and 50–64 years). The HRs were 
from 2.6 to 3.4 for stage I prehypertension and from 5.0 to 9.6 for stage II prehyper -
tension in the 3 age groups in males, and from 2.7 to 3.7 for stage I prehypertension 
and from 5.1 to 10 for stage II prehypertension in the 3 age groups in females.
Two studies in the USA addressed the progression to hypertension specifically in 
women and men [19, 20]. The Women’s Health Study included 39,322 healthy 
women older than 45 years of age who were followed for a median of 10.2 years 
[19]. Overall, 30.1% of study participants developed hypertension. The incidence of 
conversion to hypertension was substantially higher in participants with stage II 
prehypertension than in participants with stage I prehypertension or optimal BP 
(114.7 vs. 41.8 vs. 16.0 age-adjusted incidence per 1000 person-years, respectively). 
With stage II prehypertension as the reference group, the multivariable-adjusted 
HRs for stage I prehypertension and optimal BP were 0.42 (95% CI: 0.40–0.44) and 
0.17 (95% CI: 0.16–0.18), respectively. Another study evaluated 2303 male Veterans 
for a median follow-up period of 7.8 years [20]. The incidence rate of progression 
from prehypertension to hypertension was 34.4 per 1000 person-years. This study 
provides important information about the impact of prehypertension type on pro-
gression risk. The rate of incident hypertension was significantly higher in systolic- 
diastolic prehypertension (40.7%) than in participants with either isolated systolic 
prehypertension (32.3%) or isolated diastolic prehypertension (24.3%), and the dif-
ference was significant (p < 0.01 for all comparisons). Additional important infor -
mation is the impact of exercise capacity on progression rates. The RR for incident 
hypertension was progressively higher as exercise capacity decreased, and the asso-
ciation was significant across fitness categories (p < 0.001 for high compared with 
low fit individuals).
The progression rate from prehypertension to hypertension was also assessed in 
young adulthood. A retrospective analysis of more than 1000 adolescents in Houston 
revealed a progression rate of 1.1% per year during a mean follow-up period of 
21 years in participants with prehypertension compared with a progression rate of 
0.3% per year in adolescents with optimal BP [21].4 Prehypertension, the Risk of Hypertension and Events42
Six prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled trials evaluated the impact of 
lifestyle modification [22–24] and antihypertensive therapy [25–27] on the risk of 
incident hypertension in individuals with prehypertension.
The Primary Prevention of Hypertension (PPH) trial randomly assigned 201 
individuals with prehypertension in nutritional-hygienic intervention or usual care 
for 5 years [23]. Progression from prehypertension to hypertension was observed in 
19.2% of participants in the control group compared with 8.8% of participants in the 
intervention group, for an odds ratio of 2.4 (90% CI: 1.2–4.8). Of note, hypertension 
occurred earlier in participants assigned to the control group than those assigned to 
the intervention group.
In the Hypertension Prevention Trial (HPT) 841 individuals with prehyperten-
sion were randomly assigned to a control treatment group (no dietary counselling) 
or to 1 of 4 intervention groups (reduced calories, reduced sodium, reduced calories 
and sodium, or reduced sodium and increased potassium) [24]. Progression from 
prehypertension to hypertension occurred in 38.7% of participants in the control 
group during the 3-year follow-up period of the study, while the nutritional inter -
vention was not associated with significant reduction in conversion rates.
The Trial of Hypertension Prevention (TOHP) phase II compared the effects of 
weight reduction, sodium restriction, and their combination with usual care in 2382 
overweight participants with prehypertension [22]. Overall, 44.4% of study partici-
pants developed hypertension at the end of the 4-year follow-up period of the study 
in the usual care group, while the corresponding transition proportions in the 3 
intervention groups were 37.6–38.5% and the RRs for incident hypertension were 
0.85–0.87 (p = 0.02–0.06) in the three intervention groups. The proportions of inci-
dent hypertension in the usual care group at 6, 18, and 36 months during the study 
follow-up were 7.3, 21.1, and 39.2%, respectively.
The Trial of Preventing Hypertension (TROPHY) examined whether early treat-
ment of hypertension with an angiotensin receptor blocker prevents or delays the 
development of subsequent incident hypertension compared with placebo in indi-
viduals with prehypertension [25]. A total of 809 participants were randomized to 
candesartan or placebo for 2 years, followed by 2 years of placebo for all study 
participants. Overall, 40.4% developed hypertension at the year-2 visit in the pla-
cebo group, and this proportion increased to 63% at the year-4 visit in the same 
group. The corresponding proportions of incident hypertension in the intervention 
group were 13.6 and 53.2%, indicating a 66% risk reduction with candesartan at 
2 years (RR: 0.34; 95% CI: 0.25–0.44), which was later attenuated to 16% (RR: 
0.84; 95% CI: 0.75–0.95) when placebo was administered in the intervention group 
replacing candesartan. The median time to incident hypertension was 2.2 years in 
the placebo group and significantly longer (3.3 years) with candesartan. RR reduc-
tion with active therapy compared with placebo was evident throughout all pre-
specified subgroups (by age, gender, body weight, body mass index, and race).
The Prevention of Hypertension with the ACE-inhibitor Ramipril in patients 
with high-normal blood pressure (PHARAO) study assessed whether treatment of 
stage II prehypertension with ramipril can prevent or delay the progression to 
manifest office hypertension compared with placebo [26]. A total of 1008 
M. Doumas et al.43
participants with stage II prehypertension were randomly assigned to ramipril or 
placebo for 3 years. Overall, 42.9% of participants in the placebo group developed 
hypertension compared with 30.7% of participants in the ramipril group during 
the 3-year follow- up period, and the RR reduction was 34.4% (HR: 0.656; 95% 
CI: 0.533–0.807). A positive correlation of incident hypertension with SBP was 
identified in multivariate analysis (for each 1 mmHg increment, the risk increased 
by 5%).
The Prevention of Hypertension in Patients with Prehypertension (PREVER- 
Prevention) study evaluated the efficacy and safety of a low-dose diuretic for the 
prevention of hypertension and end-organ damage [27]. A total of 730 individuals 
with prehypertension were randomly assigned to chlorthalidone/amiloride or pla-
cebo for a follow-up period of 18 months. The incidence of hypertension was sig-
nificantly lower in participants allocated to diuretics compared with participants 
allocated to placebo (HR: 0.56, 95% CI: 0.38–0.82). The cumulative incidence of 
progression from prehypertension to hypertension during the 18-month follow-up 
period of the study was 19.5% with placebo and 11.7% with low-dose diuretics. 
Moreover, benefits with active therapy were observed for left ventricular mass 
(assessed by electrocardiography), while new-onset diabetes mellitus was not dif-
ferent between the two groups (5.5% with active therapy vs. 3.3% with placebo, 
p = 0.18).
4.2.1  The Progression Process
Several factors along with baseline demographic characteristics have been associ-
ated with the development of prehypertension: uric acid [28–30], dietary salt intake 
[31], arterial stiffness [32], autonomic imbalance [33, 34], obesity [35], hemoglobin 
levels [36], and subclinical inflammation [37]. In addition, several factors (along 
with baseline demographic characteristics) have been associated with the progres-
sion of prehypertension to hypertension: visceral abdominal fat [38], sympathetic 
overactivity [39], sympathovagal imbalance [34], endothelial dysfunction [40], 
impairment of coronary flow reserve [41, 42], and metabolic syndrome [41].
Target organ damage might contribute to future CV events in addition to ele-
vated BP in individuals with prehypertension compared with individuals with 
optimal BP.  Prehypertension has been associated with several types of target 
organ damage: metabolic syndrome [28, 43, 44], increased left ventricular mass 
and left ventricular hypertrophy [44– 47], left ventricular diastolic dysfunction 
[44, 47–50], coronary artery calcification [51, 52], increased minimum coronary 
resistance [42], arterial stiffness [32], increased arterial intima-media thickness 
[53, 54], retinal vascular alterations [55], microalbuminuria [56– 58], hemorheo-
logical abnormalities [59], increased tissue plasminogen activator [60], carotid 
atherosclerosis [61], poor cognitive performance [62], subclinical inflammation 
[37, 63], increased low density lipoprotein (LDL) oxidation in vivo [64], increased 
serum complement [65], excessive sympathetic response [66], and abnormalities 
in endothelial progenitor cells [67].4 Prehypertension, the Risk of Hypertension and Events44
In a recent cohort of almost 12,500 Japanese individuals for a median period of 
11.8 years, the impact of progression from prehypertension to hypertension on the 
risk of future CV events was evaluated. Prehypertensive individuals who developed 
hypertension during the follow-up period had almost a 2-times higher risk of CV 
disease (adjusted HR: 2.95; 95% CI: 1.05–8.33) compared with individuals who 
remained prehypertensive during the follow-up period [68].
4.2.2  Attenuation or Delay of Progression
Lifestyle modification has been shown to exert beneficial effects in individuals with 
prehypertension and is currently recommended for the management of prehyperten-
sion [6, 69]. Accumulating data indicate that regular physical exercise and espe-
cially aerobic exercise reduces BP, attenuates sympathetic activity, improves arterial 
stiffness, and should be an essential part of the therapeutic plan for the management 
of individuals with prehypertension [70–73]. Healthy diet has been also shown to be 
beneficial in prehypertension [74, 75]. However, long-term maintenance to healthy 
lifestyle represents the Achilles’ heel of lifestyle modification [5, 69]. In a recent 
meta-analysis, the short-term (3–6 months) benefits of exercise on BP were almost 
abolished after the first year of initiating an exercise program [76]. Recently, a 
mobile phone-based intervention was evaluated in 637 individuals with prehyper -
tension in Latin America [77]. However, a small reduction in body weight and an 
improvement in some dietary habits were not associated with a significant BP 
reduction with the intervention compared with usual care [77].
The impact of ideal health behaviors was recently evaluated in a cohort of more 
than 30,000 Chinese individuals with prehypertension [78]. In total, incident hyper -
tension was observed in 47.1% of study participants during a mean follow-up period 
of 52.2 months. It was found that hypertension was inversely associated with ideal 
health behaviors and developed in 78.6, 71.1, 63.1, 56.1, and 61.6% of prehyperten-
sive participants carrying ≤1, 2, 3, 4, or ≥5 ideal health behaviors (nonsmoking, 
regular physical activity, healthy diet, salt restriction) or ideal health factors (total 
cholesterol <200  mg/dL, blood glucose <100  mg/dL, BP <120/80  mmHg). 
Compared with participants with one or none ideal health behaviors or factors, the 
risk ratios for incident hypertension in participants with 2, 3, 4, and ≥5 ideal healthy 
behaviors or factors were 0.83 (95% CI: 0.79–0.88), 0.71 (95% CI: 0.67–0.75), 0.60 
(95% CI: 0.57–0.64), and 0.58 (95% CI: 0.52–0.64), respectively.
Antihypertensive therapy has been evaluated in the aforementioned randomized 
studies and was shown to delay the progression of prehypertension to hypertension 
[25–27]. In addition, a meta-analysis of 16 studies with >70,000 participants with 
prehypertension showed that the stroke risk was significantly reduced (by 22%) 
with antihypertensive therapy compared with placebo (RR: 0.78; 95% CI: 0.71–
0.86) [79]. Moreover, 169 individuals with prehypertension need to be treated with 
an antihypertensive drug for 4.3 years to prevent one stroke, indicating a relatively 
high number needed to treat in prehypertension [79]. Collectively, the pharmaco-
logical therapy of prehypertension remains a topic of lively discussion and debate 
[80–83].
M. Doumas et al.45
4.3  Prehypertension and CV Morbidity
Many longitudinal prospective cohort studies have evaluated the association of pre-
hypertension with CV morbidity and mortality. During the last decade, six meta- 
analyses sought to report the association of prehypertension with myocardial 
infarction, stroke, and CV events in total [84–89].
The association of prehypertension with stroke as a separate outcome was 
assessed in two meta-analyses [84, 85]. The meta-analysis by Lee et al. included 
data from 12 cohorts with >500,000 participants [84]. Prehypertension was associ-
ated with a significantly increased risk for stroke, with a RR of 1.55 (95% CI: 1.35–
1.79). A marked heterogeneity of stroke risk was observed within the 
prehypertension group according to BP. The RR for stroke was not significantly 
elevated with stage I prehypertension (RR: 1.22; 95% CI: 0.95–1.57), while the 
respective risk was significantly increased with stage II prehypertension (RR: 1.79; 
95% CI: 1.49–2.16). The meta-analysis by Huang et al. was larger and included data 
from 19 cohorts with >750,000 participants [85]. Compared with individuals with 
optimal BP, participants with prehypertension had a substantially elevated risk for 
stroke (RR: 1.66; 95% CI: 1.51–1.81). Similar to the previous meta-analysis, stroke 
risk was dependent on baseline BP and increased with increasing levels. In particu-
lar, the relative stroke risk was 1.44 for participants with stage I prehypertension 
(95% CI: 1.27–1.63), while the respective risk for stage II prehypertension was 1.95 
(95% CI: 1.73–2.21).
The association of prehypertension with coronary heart disease (CHD) as a sepa-
rate outcome was assessed in two meta-analyses [86, 87]. The meta-analysis by Shen 
et al. pooled data from 18 prospective cohorts with almost 900,000 participants [86]. 
Overall, prehypertension was associated with a substantially increased risk for CHD 
(RR: 1.36; 95% CI: 1.22–1.53). This association was significantly affected by prehy-
pertension staging. Stage I prehypertension was not associated with significantly 
increased risk for CHD (RR: 1.16; 95% CI: 0.96–1.42). In contrast, stage II prehyper -
tension was associated with a significantly elevated risk for CHD (RR: 1.53; 95% CI: 
1.19–1.97). The meta-analysis by Huang et  al. pooled data from 17 prospective 
cohorts with almost 600,000 participants and evaluated whether racial differences 
exist regarding the association of prehypertension with CHD [87]. Overall, when par -
ticipants with prehypertension were compared with participants with optimal BP, the 
risk for CHD was significantly increased (RR: 1.43; 95% CI: 1.26–1.63). Moreover, 
it was found that significant differences in RR for CHD exist for different races. In 
particular, Western participants were at significantly higher risk for CHD than Asian 
participants, and the RRs were 1.70 (95% CI: 1.49–1.94) for Western participants and 
1.25 (95% CI: 1.12–1.38) for Asian participants (ratio of RRs: 1.36; 95% CI: 1.15–
1.61). This meta-analysis provides another very important piece of information, since 
the population-attributable risk estimation indicates that 24.1% of CHD in Western 
participants may be attributed to prehypertension, while only 8.4% of CHD in Asian 
participants may be attributed to prehypertension [to 73].
Two meta-analyses evaluated the risk for CV events as a whole as well as stroke 
and myocardial infarction separately [88, 89]. The meta-analysis by Huang et al. 
included data from 18 prospective cohorts with >450,000 participants [88]. Overall, 4 Prehypertension, the Risk of Hypertension and Events46
participants with prehypertension were at significantly higher risk for CV events 
when compared with participants with optimal BP (RR: 1.55; 95% CI: 1.41–1.71). 
The respective RRs for CHD and stroke were 1.50 (95% CI: 1.30–1.74) and 1.71 
(95% CI: 1.55–1.89). Once again, the RR depended on prehypertension staging. 
Compared with optimal BP, stage I prehypertension was associated with a signifi-
cantly increased risk for CV events (RR: 1.46; 95% CI: 1.32–1.62) and the risk was 
further elevated in stage II prehypertension (RR: 1.80; 95% CI: 1.41–2.31). The 
meta-analysis by Guo et al. pooled data from 29 cohorts with >1 million partici-
pants [89]. Overall, prehypertension was associated with a significantly elevated 
risk for CV events (RR: 1.44; 95% CI: 1.35–1.53) compared with optimal BP. The 
respective RRs for stroke and myocardial infarction were 1.73 (95% CI: 1.61–1.85) 
and 1.79 (95% CI: 1.45–2.22) for participants with prehypertension compared with 
participants with optimal BP. Similarly to other meta-analyses, the RR was strongly 
affected by prehypertension staging. Stage I prehypertension was associated with a 
significantly elevated risk for CV events (RR: 1.24; 95% CI: 1.10–1.39), and the 
risk was further elevated in stage II prehypertension (RR: 1.56; 95% CI: 1.36–1.78). 
Likewise, the RRs for stroke and myocardial infarction were 1.35 (95% CI: 1.10–
1.66) and 1.43 (95% CI: 1.10–1.86), respectively, in stage I prehypertension and 
were further elevated to 1.95 (95% CI: 1.69–2.24) and 1.99 (95% CI: 1.59–2.50), 
respectively, in stage II prehypertension.
4.4  Prehypertension and Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)
Three recent meta-analyses have addressed the association of prehypertension with 
end-stage renal disease [90], CKD [91], and decreased estimated glomerular filtra-
tion rate (eGFR) in the general population [92].
The first meta-analysis included data from one million individuals who partici-
pated in six prospective cohort studies [90]. Individuals with prehypertension were 
at significantly higher risk for end-stage renal disease (RR: 1.59; 95% CI: 1.39–
1.91) when compared with individuals with optimal BP. Moreover, a graded asso-
ciation with end-stage renal disease was observed with increasing BP within the 
prehypertension range. In particular, stage I prehypertension was associated with 
significantly increased risk for end-stage renal disease compared with optimal BP 
(RR: 1.44; 95% CI: 1.19–1.74), and the risk was further increased among individu-
als with stage II prehypertension (RR:2.02; 95% CI: 1.70–2.40).
The second meta-analysis included >250,000 individuals who participated in 
seven cohort studies, mainly conducted in the Far East [91]. Prehypertension was 
associated with an increased risk for CKD compared with optimal BP (pooled RR: 
1.28; 95% CI: 1.13–1.44). This association between prehypertension and future 
development of CKD was gender- and ethnic-dependent. In particular, the associa-
tion was evident in females (pooled RR: 1.29; 95% CI: 1.01–1.63) but not in males. 
Similarly, the association was evident in Far East participants (pooled RR: 1.37; 
95% CI: 1.18–1.59) but not in European and Middle-East individuals.
M. Doumas et al.47
In the third meta-analysis data from 16 cohorts with >315,000 participants were 
pooled and analyzed [92]. Renal function deterioration was observed in 6.6% of 
participants during a mean follow-up period of 6.5 years. Prehypertension was asso-
ciated with a significantly increased risk for renal function deterioration defined as 
a decline in eGFR (RR: 1.19; 95% CI: 1.07–1.33), while the respective RR for 
hypertensive individuals was 1.76 (95% CI: 1.58–1.97). Moreover, it was found that 
an increase of SBP and DBP by 10 mmHg was associated with a greater RR for 
renal function deterioration, which was 1.08 for prehypertension (95% CI: 1.04–
1.11) and 1.12 for hypertension (1.04–1.20). Further analysis identified older age as 
the only significant contributor for renal function deterioration.
A recent very large study from Israel provides further credence on the associa-
tion between prehypertension and CKD. The study included 2.19 million healthy 
asymptomatic adolescents 16–19 years old evaluated for military service and fol-
lowed for a median of 16.8  years [93]. Prehypertension (defined either as BP 
between the 90th and 95th percentile or BP between 120 and 139 mmHg for SBP 
and/or 80–89 mmHg for DBP) was associated with a 32% increased risk for future 
end-stage renal disease (HR: 1.32; 95% CI: 1.11–1.58) compared with adolescents 
with optimal BP, which was not substantially lower than the respective risk of 
hypertensive adolescents (HR: 1.44; 95% CI: 1.17–1.79).
A recent study of almost 100,000 individuals aged 80–89 years in Japan unveiled 
a significant association between prehypertension and glomerular hyperfiltration 
[94]. The prevalence of glomerular hyperfiltration increased with increasing stages 
of prehypertension. In particular, when individuals with optimal BP were used as 
the reference group, those with stage 1 prehypertension had an odds ratio of 1.10 
(95% CI: 1.00–1.20), and those with stage 2 prehypertension had an odds ratio of 
1.33 (95% CI: 1.21–1.47). Glomerular hyperfiltration is mainly driven by increased 
intraglomerular pressure in subjects with elevated BP [95] and is considered an 
early alteration of renal function [96]. Long-term glomerular hyperfiltration con-
tributes to CKD [97, 98] through progressive glomerular sclerosis [99]. Glomerular 
hyperfiltration is associated with a faster decline of glomerular filtration rate and 
thus renal function [100], while the prevention of glomerular hyperfiltration is asso-
ciated with less glomerular injury [101]. Therefore, the timely recognition of prehy-
pertensive individuals with glomerular hyperfiltration can identify those at increased 
risk for CKD who might benefit from early intervention.
4.5  Prehypertension and CV and All-Cause Mortality
The landmark study by Robinson and Brucer was the first to report the impact of 
prehypertension on mortality risk: “… the mortality of any random group of 1000 
persons with pressures over 120 systolic and 80 diastolic is higher than that of simi-
lar group with pressures under these levels” [4]. Several longitudinal studies have 
evaluated the association of prehypertension with CV and/or all-cause mortality, 
and three relevant meta-analyses are available [102–104].4 Prehypertension, the Risk of Hypertension and Events48
The meta-analysis by Wang et al. pooled data from 13 prospective cohort studies 
involving almost 400,000 participants [102]. Prehypertension was associated with 
an increased risk for CV mortality (pooled RR: 1.17; 95% CI: 1.07–1.27) when 
compared with optimal BP. Prehypertension staging significantly affected the asso-
ciation between prehypertension and CV mortality. There was a trend towards 
increased CV mortality in stage I prehypertension that failed marginally to reach 
statistical significance (RR: 1.18; 95% CI: 0.98–1.42), while the respective risk was 
significantly elevated in stage II prehypertension (RR: 1.33; 95% CI: 1.13–1.58). In 
contrast, no association between prehypertension and all-cause mortality was found. 
The overall RR conferred by prehypertension was 1.01 (95% CI: 0.95–1.08). 
Similarly, neither stage I nor stage II prehypertension were associated with elevated 
all-cause mortality risk (RR: 0.99; 95% CI: 0.88–1.13, and RR: 1.02; 95% CI: 0.97–
1,08, respectively).
In the meta-analysis of Guo et al. data from >870,000 individuals participating 
in 13 prospective cohorts were pooled and analyzed [103]. Prehypertension was 
associated with an elevated risk for CV mortality (RR: 1.32; 95% CI: 1.16–1.50). 
The same was evident for stage II prehypertension (RR: 1.26; 95% CI: 1.13–1.41) 
but not for stage I prehypertension (RR: 1.10; 95% CI: 0.92–1.30). Prehypertension 
was not associated with all-cause mortality in this meta-analysis as well. The rela-
tive all-cause mortality risk was 1.03 (95% CI: 0.91–1.15) for the prehypertension 
group as a whole, 0.91 (95% CI: 0.81–1.02) for stage I prehypertension, and 1.00 
(95% CI: 0.95–1.06) for stage II prehypertension.
The larger meta-analysis was performed by Huang et al. and pooled data from 20 
prospective cohorts with >1.1 million participants [104]. Prehypertension signifi-
cantly increased the risk for CHD and stroke mortality (RR: 1.12; 95% CI: 1.02–
1.23, and RR: 1.41; 95% CI: 1.28–1.56, respectively). Likewise, prehypertension 
was associated with a significantly elevated risk for CV mortality (RR: 1.28; 95% 
CI: 1.16–1.40). This association was evident for stage II prehypertension (RR: 1.28; 
95% CI: 1.16–1.41) but not for stage I prehypertension (RR: 1.08; 95% CI: 0.98–
1.18). Finally, prehypertension was not associated with all-cause mortality after 
adjustments for all covariates (RR: 1.03; 95% CI: 0.97–1.10), and the same applied 
for both stage I and II prehypertension.
4.6  Critical Evaluation
Collectively, available evidence demonstrates that individuals with prehypertension 
have a two- to threefold increased risk for incident hypertension compared with 
individuals with optimal BP. The conversion rates from prehypertension to hyper -
tension vary significantly among the studies, and the variation may be attributed to 
several factors, such as the duration of the study, baseline BP, age, race, body mass 
index, physical fitness, and comorbidities. In particular, regarding the duration of 
follow-up period, it is obvious that the longer the duration of the study, the higher 
M. Doumas et al.49
the proportion of participants who will develop hypertension. In addition, the higher 
the baseline BP, the greater the proportion of participants who will develop hyper -
tension, with >50% increased risk for incident hypertension among individuals with 
stage II compared with stage I prehypertension. Moreover, African-Americans are 
more likely to progress from prehypertension to hypertension more rapidly than 
Caucasians with prehypertension. Furthermore, the higher the body mass index and 
the older the age, the greater the risk for incident hypertension in prehypertensive 
individuals. In addition, impaired physical fitness as expressed with limited exercise 
capacity is associated with increased risk for developing hypertension. Finally, 
comorbidities such as diabetes mellitus [73] and CKD significantly increase the risk 
of prehypertensive individuals to develop hypertension.
Overall, available data indicates that prehypertension is associated with a sig-
nificantly increased risk for CHD, stroke, total CV disease, and CV mortality, but 
not with all-cause mortality (maybe due to the relatively short follow-up period of 
several studies). The elevated CV risk strongly depends on prehypertension stag-
ing; individuals with stage II prehypertension are at a significantly greater risk for 
CV morbidity and mortality than individuals with stage I prehypertension. In 
addition, the impact of prehypertension is greater when fatal and nonfatal CV 
events are combined compared with the evaluation of fatal CV events alone. In 
addition, CV events are more likely to occur in prehypertensive individuals who 
develop hypertension compared with individuals who remain prehypertensive. 
Moreover, the earlier the progression from prehypertension to hypertension is, the 
higher the risk for CV events. It has to be acknowledged that all meta-analyses 
addressing the association of prehypertension with CV outcomes report signifi-
cantly elevated RRs in prehypertensive compared with normotensive individuals, 
without reporting (in most cases) however the absolute morbidity and mortality 
risks, limiting the ability to estimate the number of patients needed to treat over a 
certain period for the prevention of one event. In general, the absolute risk of pre-
hypertensive individuals is rather low, unless prehypertension is associated with 
overt CV disease or clustering multiple CV risk factors, or significant target organ 
damage.
Given, however the high prevalence of prehypertension in the general population 
(it is estimated that 40 million individuals have stage I and 30 million individuals 
have stage II prehypertension in the US), and the frequent coexistence of CV risk 
factors, target organ damage, or overt CV disease, it becomes obvious that prehy-
pertension is a major public health problem that requires immediate attention and 
management. Pharmacological therapy is a matter of hot debate and is not likely to 
gain implementation in the near future. In contrast, lifestyle modification is strongly 
recommended by all guidelines for the management of individuals with prehyper -
tension in the effort to prevent or delay the progression of prehypertension to hyper -
tension. Therefore, primary care physicians should intensity efforts for the 
widespread implementation and maintenance of healthy measures to limit the detri-
mental consequences of prehypertension.4 Prehypertension, the Risk of Hypertension and Events50
 Conclusions
Prehypertension is placed between normotension and hypertension. Accumulating 
evidence proved that prehypertension is a precursor of hypertension in a high 
proportion of individuals. The progression rates are higher in individuals with 
stage II prehypertension, obesity, and other comorbidities. Of major clinical 
importance, prehypertension is associated with increased risk for CHD, stroke, 
CKD, and CV but not all-cause mortality. The detrimental consequences of pre-
hypertension, especially stage II prehypertension, justify its utility in real life 
clinical practice and should attract the attention of practicing physicians to 
appropriately manage prehypertensive individuals.
Declaration of Interest  This review was written independently; no company or institution sup-
ported the authors financially or by providing a professional writer. M.D. received honoraria from 
Menarini, WinMedica, Bayer, Boehringer, Merck, and Unipharma. N.K. has given talks, attended 
conferences, and participated in trials sponsored by Amgen, Angelini, Astra Zeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Galenica, MSD, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, and WinMedica. D.P.M. has given 
talks and attended conferences sponsored by MSD, AstraZeneca, and Libytec.
References
 1. Orth J. On the morphology of carcinoma and the parasitic theory of its etiology. Ann Surg. 
1904;40:773–81.
 2. Levin I. Changes in the tissue surrounding a growing tumor and the significance of the precan-
cerous state. J Exp Med. 1912;16:149–54.
 3. Rodman WL. Cancer and precancerous conditions. Ann Surg. 1914;59:47–64.
 4. Robinson SC, Brucer M. Range of normal blood pressure: a statistical and clinical study of 
11,383 persons. Arch Intern Med. 1939;64:409–44.
 5. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, et al. Seventh 
report of the Joint National Committee on prevention, evaluation, and treatment of high blood 
pressure. Hypertension. 2003;42:1206–52.
 6. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizibash N, Peto R, Collins R. Age specific relevance of usual blood 
pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 
prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360:1903–13.
 7. Laurent S, Boutouyrie P. The structural factor of hypertension: large and small artery altera-
tions. Circ Res. 2015;116:1007–21.
 8. Vasan RS, Beiser A, Seshadri S, Larson MG, Kannel WB, D’Agostino RB, et al. Residual 
lifetime risk for developing hypertension in middle-aged women and men. The Framingham 
Heart Study. JAMA. 2002;287:1003–10.
 9. Leitschuh M, Cupples A, Kannel W, Gagnon D, Chobanian A. High-normal blood pressure 
progression to hypertension in the Framingham Heart Study. Hypertension. 1991;17:22–7.
 10. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, Kannel WB, Levy D. Assessment of frequency of progression 
to hypertension in non-hypertensive participants in the Framingham Heart Study: a cohort 
study. Lancet. 2001;358:1682–6.
 11. Winegarden CR. From prehypertension to hypertension? Additional evidence. Ann Epidemiol. 
2005;15:720–5.
 12. Selassie A, Wagner S, Laken ML, Ferguson L, Ferdinand K, Egan BM. Progression is acceler -
ated from prehypertension to hypertension in blacks. Hypertension. 2011;58:579–87.
 13. Gu D, Wildman RP, Wu X, Reynolds K, Huang J, Chen CS, et al. Incidence and predictors of 
hypertension over 8 years among Chinese men and women. J Hypertens. 2007;25:517–23.
M. Doumas et al.51
 14. Zheng L, Sun Z, Zhang X, Xu C, Li J, Li M, et al. Risk of progression to hypertension across 
baseline blood pressure in nonhypertensive participants among rural Chinese adults: a pro-
spective study. J Hypertens. 2010;28:1158–65.
 15. Zheng L, Sun Z, Zhang X, Xu C, Li J, Hu D, et al. Predictors of progression from prehyper -
tension to hypertension among rural Chinese adults: results from Liaoning Province. Eur J 
Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2010;17:217–22.
 16. Sun Z, Zheng L, Detrano R, Zhang X, Xu C, Li J, et al. Incidence and predictors of hypertension 
among rural Chinese adults: results from Liaoning Province. Ann Fam Med. 2010;8:19–24.
 17. Sun Z, Zheng L, Detrano R, Zhang X, Xu C, Li J, et al. Risk of progression to hypertension 
in a rural Chinese women population with prehypertension and normal blood pressure. Am J 
Hypertens. 2010;23:627–32.
 18. Kurioka S, Horie S, Inoue A, Mafune K, Tsuda Y , Otsuji Y . Risk of progression to hypertension 
in nonhypertensive Japanese workers aged 20–64 years. J Hypertens. 2014;32:236–44.
 19. Conen D, Ridker PM, Buring JE, Glynn RJ. Risk of cardiovascular events among women with 
high normal blood pressure or blood pressure progression: prospective cohort study. BMJ. 
2007;335:432.
 20. Faselis C, Doumas M, Kokkinos JP, Panagiotakos D, Kheirbek R, Sheriff HM, et al. Exercise 
capacity and progression from prehypertension to hypertension. Hypertension. 2012;60:333–8.
 21. Redwine KM, Acosta AA, Poffenbarger T, Portman RJ, Samuels J. Development of hyperten-
sion in adolescents with prehypertension. J Pediatr. 2012;160:98–103.
 22. The Trials of Hypertension Prevention Collaborative Group. Effects of weight loss and sodium 
reduction intervention on blood pressure and hypertension incidence in overweight people 
with high-normal blood pressure. The Trials of Hypertension Prevention Phase II. Arch Intern 
Med. 1997;57:657–67.
 23. Stamler R, Stamler J, Gosch FC, Civinelli J, Fishman J, McKeever P, et al. Primary prevention 
of hypertension by nutritional-hygienic means. Final report of a randomized, controlled trial. 
JAMA. 1989;262:1801–7.
 24. Hypertension Prevention Trial Research Group. The Hypertension Prevention Trial: three- year 
effects of dietary changes on blood pressure. Arch Intern Med. 1990;150:153–62.
 25. Julius S, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, Weber MA, Michelson EL, Kaciroti N, et al. Feasibility of treat-
ing prehypertension with an angiotensin receptor blocker. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:1685–97.
 26. Lüders S, Schrader J, Berger J, Unger T, Zidek W, Böhm M, et al; PHARAO Study Group. The 
PHARAO Study: prevention of hypertension with the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibi-
tor ramipril in patients with high-normal blood pressure—a prospective, randomized, con-
trolled prevention trial of the German Hypertension League. J Hypertens. 2008;26:1487–96.
 27. Fuchs SC, Poli-de-Figueiredo CE, Figueiredo Neto JA, Scala LC, Whelton PK, Mosele F, 
et al. Effectiveness of chlorthalidone plus amiloride for the prevention of hypertension: the 
PREVER-Prevention randomized clinical trial. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e004248.
 28. Rizzo M, Pbradovic M, Labudovic-Borovic M, Nikolic D, Montalto G, Rizvi AA, et al. Uric acid 
metabolism in prehypertension and the metabolic syndrome. Curr Vasc Pharmacol. 2014;12:572–85.
 29. Jiang M, Gong D, Fan Y . Serum uric acid levels and risk of prehypertension: a meta-analysis. 
Clin Chem Lab Med. 2017l;55:314–21.
 30. Liu L, Gu Y , Li C, Zhang Q, Meng G, Wu H, et al. Serum uric acid is an independent pre-
dictor for developing prehypertension: a population-based prospective cohort study. J Hum 
Hypertens. 2017;31:116–20.
 31. Zhao X, Yang X, Zhang X, Li Y , Zhao X, Ren L, et al. Dietary salt intake and coronary athero-
sclerosis in patients with prehypertension. J Clin Hypertens. 2014;16:575–80.
 32. Tomiyama H, Yamashina A. Arterial stiffness in prehypertension: a possible vicious cycle. J 
Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2012;5:280–6.
 33. Davis JT, Rao F, Naqshbandi D, Fung MM, Zhang K, Schork AJ, et al. Autonomic and hemo-
dynamic origins of prehypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:2206–16.
 34. Pal GK, Pal P, Nanda N, Amudharaj D, Adithan C. Cardiovascular dysfunctions and sympa-
thovagal imbalance in hypertension and prehypertension: physiological perspectives. Futur 
Cardiol. 2013;9:53–69.4 Prehypertension, the Risk of Hypertension and Events52
 35. Martín-Espinosa N, Díez-Fernández A, Sánchez-López M, Rivero-Merino I, Lucas-De La Cruz 
L, Solera-Martínez M, et al. Movi-Kids Group. Prevalence of high blood pressure and associa-
tion with obesity in Spanish schoolchildren aged 4-6 years old. PLoS One. 2017;12:e0170926.
 36. Senthil S, Krishndasa SN. Prehypertension in apparently healthy young adults: incidence and 
influence of hemoglobin level. J Clin Diagn Res. 2015;9:10–2.
 37. Nandeesha H, Bobby Z, Selvaraj N, Rajappa M. Prehypertension: is it an inflammatory state? 
Clin Chim Acta. 2015;451:338–42.
 38. Hwang YC, Fujimoto WY , Kahn SE, Leonetti DL, Boyko EJ. Greater visceral abdominal fat 
is associated with a lower probability of conversion of prehypertension to normotension. J 
Hypertens. 2017;35:1213–8.
 39. Hering D, Kara T, Kucharska W, Somers VK, Narkiewicz K. Longitudinal tracking of muscle 
sympathetic nerve activity and its relationship with blood pressure in subjects with prehyper -
tension. Blood Press. 2016;25:184–92.
 40. Millgard J, Hägg A, Sarabi M, Lind L. Endothelium-dependent vasodilation in normotensive 
subjects with a familial history of essential hypertension and in young subjects with borderline 
hypertension. Blood Press. 2002;11:279–84.
 41. Erdogan D, Ozaydin M, Icli A, Gonul E, Yucel H, Arslan A, et al. Echocardiographic predic-
tors of progression from prehypertension to hypertension. J Hypertens. 2012;30:1639–45.
 42. Palombo C, Kozakova M, Magagna A, Bigalli G, Morizzo C, Ghiadoni L, et al. Early impair -
ment of coronary flow reserve and increase in minimum coronary resistance in borderline 
hypertensive patients. J Hypertens. 2010;18:453–9.
 43. Katsiki N, Doumas M, Athyros VG, Karagiannis A. Prehypertension and the cardiometabolic 
syndrome: targeting several risk factors to achieve maximum benefit. Expert Rev Cardiovasc 
Ther. 2014;12:295–6.
 44. Jung MH, Ihm SH, Lee DH, Chung WB, Jung HO, Youn HJ. Prehypertension is associated 
with early complications of atherosclerosis but not with exercise capacity. Int J Cardiol. 
2017;227:387–92.
 45. Mousa TM, Akinseye OA, Berekashvili K, Akinboboye OO.  Correlation of prehyperten-
sion with left ventricular mass assessed by magnetic resonance imaging. Int J Hypertens. 
2015;2015, Article no. 742658.
 46. Oyama J, Node K. Prevalence of prehypertension and left ventricular hypertrophy. Hypertens 
Res. 2017;40:544–5.
 47. Markus MR, Stritzke J, Lieb W, Mayer B, Luchner A, Döring A, et al. Implications of persis-
tent prehypertension for ageing related changes in left ventricular geometry and function: the 
MONICA/KORA Augsburg study. J Hypertens. 2008;26:2040–9.
 48. Jung JY , Park SK, Oh CM, Kang JG, Choi JM, Ryoo JH, et al. The influence of prehyperten-
sion, controlled and uncontrolled hypertension on left ventricular diastolic function and struc-
ture in the general Korean population. Hypertens Res. 2017;40:606–12.
 49. Jang SY , Kim S, Lee CK, Cho EJ, Cho SJ, Lee SC. Prehypertension and left ventricular dia-
stolic dysfunction in middle-aged Koreans. Korean Circ J. 2016;46:536–41.
 50. Santos AB, Gupta DK, Bello NA, Gori M, Claggett B, Fuchs FD, et al. Prehypertension is 
associated with abnormalities of cardiac structure and function in the Atherosclerosis Risk in 
Communities Study. Am J Hypertens. 2016;29:568–74.
 51. Lehmann N, Erbel R, Mahabadi AA, Kälsch H, Möhlenkamp S, Moebus S, et al. Accelerated 
progression of coronary artery calcification in hypertension but also prehypertension. J 
Hypertens. 2016;34:2233–42.
 52. Pletcher M, Bibbins-Domingo K, Lewis CE, Wei GS, Sidney S, Carr JJ, et al. Prehypertension 
during young adulthood and coronary calcium later in life. Ann Intern Med. 2008;149:91–9.
 53. Manios E, Michas F, Tsivgoulis G, Stamatelopoulos K, Tsagalis G, Koroboki E, et al. Impact of 
prehypertension on carotid artery intima-media thickening: actual or masked? Atherosclerosis. 
2011;214:215–9.
 54. Manios E, Tsivgoulis G, Koroboki E, Stamatelopoulos K, Papamichael C, Toumanidis S, et al. 
Impact of prehypertension on common carotid artery intima-media thickness and left ventricu-
lar mass. Stroke. 2009;40:1515–8.
M. Doumas et al.53
 55. Ikram MK, Witteman JC, Vingerling JR, Breteler MM, Hofman A, de Jong PT. Retinal vessel 
diameters and risk of hypertension: the Rotterdam study. Hypertension. 2006;47:189–94.
 56. Chen J, Muntner P, Hamm LL, Jones DW, Batuman V , Fonseca V , et al. The metabolic syn-
drome and chronic kidney disease in US adults. Ann Intern Med. 2004;140:167–74.
 57. Bianchi S, Bigazzi R, Campese V . Microalbuminuria in essential hypertension: significance, 
pathophysiology, and therapeutic implications. Am J Kidney Dis. 1999;34:973–95.
 58. Lee JE, Kim YG, Choi YH, Huh W, Kim DJ, Oh HY . Serum uric acid is associated with micro-
albuminuria in prehypertension. Hypertension. 2006;47:962–7.
 59. Tripolino C, Gnasso A, Carallo C, Scavelli FB, Irace C. Hemorheological profiles of subjects 
with prehypertension. Hypertens Res. 2006;39:519–23.
 60. Stamler J, Stamler R, Neaton JD. Blood pressure systolic and diastolic, and cardiovascular 
risks. Arch Intern Med. 1993;153:598–615.
 61. Hong H, Wang H, Liao H. Prehypertension is associated with increased carotid atherosclerotic 
plaque in the community population of Southern China. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2013;13:20.
 62. Knecht S, Wersching H, Lohmann H, Bruchmann M, Duning T, Dziewas R, et al. High normal 
blood pressure is associated with poor cognitive performance. Hypertension. 2008;51:663–8.
 63. Chrysohoou C, Pitsavos C, Panagiotakos DB, Skoumas J, Stefanadis C. Association between 
prehypertension status and inflammatory markers related to atherosclerotic disease. Am J 
Hypertens. 2004;17:568–73.
 64. Toikka JO, Laine H, Ahotupa M, Haapanen A, Viikari JS, Hartiala JJ, et al. Increased arterial 
intima-media thickness and in vivo LDL oxidation in young men with borderline hyperten-
sion. Hypertension. 2000;36:929–33.
 65. Bao X, Meng G, Zhang Q, Liu L, Wu H, Du H, et al. Elevated serum complement C3 levels are 
associated with prehypertension in an adult population. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2017;39:42–9.
 66. Bond V , Curry BH, Adams RG, Obisesan T, Pemminati S, Gorantla VR, et al. Cardiovascular 
responses to an isometric handgrip exercise in females with prehypertension. N Am J Med Sci. 
2016;8:243–9.
 67. Di Stefano R, Barsotti MC, Felice F, Vlachopoulos C, Barbarini A. Endothelial progenitor 
cells in prehypertension. Curr Pharm Des. 2011;17:3002–19.
 68. Ishikawa Y , Ishikawa J, Ishikawa S, Kario K, Kajii E. Progression from prehypertension to 
hypertension and risk of cardiovascular disease. J Epidemiol. 2017;27:8–13.
 69. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redon J, Zanchetti A, Böhm M, et al. ESH/ESC guide-
lines for the management of arterial hypertension. J Hypertens. 2013;31:1281–357.
 70. Saxena Y , Gupta R, Moinuddin A, Narwal R. Blood pressure reduction following accumulated 
physical activity in prehypertensive. J Family Med Prim Care. 2017;5:349–56.
 71. Montero D, Roche E, Martinez-Rodriguez A. The impact of aerobic exercise training on arte-
rial stiffness in pre- and hypertensive subjects: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J 
Cardiol. 2014;173:361–8.
 72. Ash GI, Taylor BA, Thompson PD, MacDonald HV , Lamberti L, Chen MH, et al. The anti-
hypertensive effects of aerobic versus isometric handgrip resistance exercise. J Hypertens. 
2017;35:291–9.
 73. Bushman B. Promoting exercise as medicine for prediabetes and prehypertension. Curr Sports 
Med Rep. 2014;13:233–9.
 74. Slimko ML, Mensah GA. The role of diets, food, and nutrients in the prevention and control of 
hypertension and prehypertension. Cardiol Clin. 2010;28:665–74.
 75. Davinelli S, Scapagnini G. Polyphenols: a promising nutritional approach to prevent or reduce 
the progression of prehypertension. High Blood Press Cardiovasc Prev. 2016;23:197–202.
 76. Williamson W, Foster C, Reid H, Kelly P, Lewandowski AJ, Boardman H, et al. Will exercise 
advice be sufficient for treatment of young adults with prehypertension and hypertension? A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Hypertension. 2016;68:78–87.
 77. Rubinstein A, Miranda JJ, Beratarrechea A, Diez-Canseco F, Kanter R, Gutierrez L, et  al. 
Effectiveness of an mHealth intervention to improve the cardiometabolic profile of people with 
prehypertension in low-resource urban settings in Latin-America: a randomized controlled 
trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2016;4:52–63.4 Prehypertension, the Risk of Hypertension and Events54
 78. Gao J, Sun H, Liang X, Gao M, Zhao H, Qi Y , et al. Ideal cardiovascular health behaviours 
and factors prevent the development of hypertension in prehypertensive subjects. Clin Exp 
Hypertens. 2015;37:650–5.
 79. Sipahi I, Swaminathan A, Natesan V , Debanne SM, Simon DI, Fang JC. Effect of antihy-
pertensive therapy on incident stroke in cohorts with prehypertensive blood pressure levels. 
Stroke. 2012;43:432–40.
 80. McInnes G. Prehypertension: how low to go and do drugs have a role? Br J Clin Pharmacol. 
2011;73:187–93.
 81. Gaddam KK, Ventura H, Lavie CJ. Antihypertensive therapy versus alternative therapeutic 
options for prehypertension: an evidence-based approach. Futur Cardiol. 2012;8:115–22.
 82. Aronow WS. Treating hypertension and prehypertension in older people: when, whom and 
how. Maturitas. 2015;80:31–6.
 83. Collier SR, Landram MJ. Treatment of prehypertension: lifestyle and/or medication. Vasc 
Health Risk Manag. 2012;8:613–9.
 84. Lee M, Saver JL, Chang B, Chang KH, Hao Q, Ovbiagele B. Presence of baseline prehyper -
tension and risk of incident stroke. A meta-analysis. Neurology. 2011;77:1330–7.
 85. Huang Y , Cai X, Li Y , Su L, Mai W, Wang S, et al. Prehypertension and the risk of stroke. 
Neurology. 2014;82:1153–61.
 86. Shen L, Ma H, Xiang MX, Wang JA. Meta-analysis of cohort studies of baseline prehyperten-
sion and risk of coronary heart disease. Am J Cardiol. 2013;112:266–71.
 87. Huang Y , Cai X, Liu C, Zhu D, Hua J, Hu Y , et al. Prehypertension and the risk of coro-
nary heart disease in Asian and Western populations: a meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2015;4:e001519.
 88. Haung Y , Wang S, Cai X, Mai W, Hu Y , Tang H, et al. Prehypertension and incidence of car -
diovascular disease: a meta-analysis. BMC Med. 2013;11:177.
 89. Guo X, Zhang X, Guo L, Li Z, Zheng L, Yu S, et al. Association between pre-hypertension 
and cardiovascular outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. 
Curr Hypertens Rep. 2013;15:703–16.
 90. Huang Y , Cai X, Zhang J, Mai W, Wang S, Hu Y , et al. Prehypertension and incidence of 
ESRD: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014;63:76–83.
 91. Li Y , Xia P, Xu L, Wang Y , Chen L. A meta-analysis on prehypertension and chronic kidney 
disease. PLoS One. 2016;11:e0156575.
 92. Garofalo C, Borelli S, Pacilio M, Minutolo R, Chiodini P, De Nicola L, et al. Hypertension 
and prehypertension and prediction of development of decreased estimated GFR in the gen-
eral population: a meta-analysis of cohort studies. Am J Kidney Dis. 2016;67:89–97.
 93. Leiba A, Twig G, Vivante A, Skorecki K, Golan E, Derazne E, et  al. Prehypertension 
among 2.19 million adolescents and future risk for end-stage renal disease. J Hypertens. 
2017;35:1290–6.
 94. Okada R, Yasuda Y , Tsushita K, Wakai K, Hamajima N, Matsuo S. Glomerular hyperfiltration 
in prediabetes and prehypertension. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012;27:1821–5.
 95. Brenner BM, Lawler EV , Mackenzie HS.  The hyperfiltration theory: a paradigm shift in 
nephrology. Kidney Int. 1996;49:1774–7.
 96. Losito A, Zampi I, Fortunati I, del Favero A. Glomerular hyperfiltration and albuminuria in 
essential hypertension. Nephron. 1988;49:84–5.
 97. Mogensen CE.  Early glomerular hyperfiltration in insulin-dependent diabetics and late 
nephropathy. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 1986;46:201–6.
 98. Rudberg S, Persson B, Dahlquist G.  Increased glomerular filtration rate as a predictor of 
diabetic nephropathy-an 8-year prospective study. Kidney Int. 1992;41:822–8.
 99. Gabbai FB. Renal reserve in patients with high blood pressure. Semin Nephrol. 1995;15:482–7.
 100. Sl J, Wiseman MJ, Viberti GC.  Glomerular hyperfiltration as a risk factor for diabetic 
nephropathy: five year report of a prospective study. Diabetologia. 1991;34:59–60.
 101. Neuringer JR, Brenner BM. Glomerular hypertension: cause and consequence of renal injury. 
J Hypertens. 1992;Suppl 10:S91–7.
M. Doumas et al.55
 102. Wang S, Wu H, Zhang Q, Xu J, Fan Y . Impact of baseline prehypertension on cardiovascu-
lar events and all-cause mortality in the general population: a meta-analysis of prospective 
cohort studies. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:4857–60.
 103. Guo X, Zhang Y , Zheng L, Guo L, Li Z, Yu S, et al. Prehypertension is not associated with 
all-cause mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. PLoS One. 
2013;8:e61796.
 104. Huang Y , Su L, Cai X, Mai W, Wang S, Hu Y , et al. Association of all-cause and cardiovascu-
lar mortality with prehypertension: a meta-analysis. Am Heart J. 2014;167:160–8.4 Prehypertension, the Risk of Hypertension and Events57 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_5
T. Rosenthal  
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology,  
Tel-Aviv University, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel
e-mail: rtalma@post.tau.ac.il5Prehypertension and the 
Cardiometabolic Syndrome
Talma Rosenthal
5.1  Definitions of Prehypertension
The USA Joint National Committee Guidelines (JNC7) on hypertension which 
were published in 2003 [1] combined the two categories: normal blood pressure 
(BP) and high-normal BP, and thus introduced prehypertension as a new category of 
BP including individuals with systolic BP 120–139  mmHg or diastolic BP 
80–89 mmHg.
However, the European societies ESH/ESC published committee guidelines in 
2007 [2] rejected this terminology and the joining of these two BP categories. Their 
argument was that even in the Framingham study the risk of developing hyperten-
sion was higher in subjects with high-normal BP (130–139/85–89 mmHg range) 
than in patients with normal BP (120–129/80–84 mmHg), therefore there is little 
reason to combine both groups.
Additionally, considering the ominous significance of the term hypertension, 
they presumed “prehypertension” may create anxiety and fear in many subjects.
Accordingly, the Framingham study results demonstrated a relatively rapid pro-
gression to hypertension in individuals with high-normal BP, in which the incidence 
of hypertension was 37.3% and 49.5% for the 30- to 64-year and  ≥65-year groups, 
respectively. Whereas a relatively lower risk of developing hypertension was evi-
dent among those with normal BP, which progressed over 4 years to hypertensive 
levels in 17.6% of individuals between 30 and 64 years of age and in 25.5% of those 
≥65 years of age [3].58
Over the years the term prehypertension has been again divided into stage 1 pre-
hypertension which correlates to the previous normal BP while BP in the upper 
range (130–139/85–89 mmHg) is referred to as stage 2 prehypertension. This divi-
sion is significant since individuals with BP in the upper-range of prehypertension 
were shown to be at twice the risk of developing hypertension than individuals with 
lower BP values [3].
Hypertension is a major modifiable risk factor for cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality. Guidelines recommended lowering BP to below 140/90  mmHg in the 
general population and below 130/80 mmHg in diabetic patients [1, 2]. Thus, even 
individuals with prehypertension, with BP below the conventional threshold for 
intervention with antihypertensive drugs, still have an increased risk of cardiovascu-
lar disease (CVD). A well-designed meta-analysis showed that particularly those in 
the upper-range prehypertension (130/80 to 139/89 mmHg) have an increased risk 
of developing coronary heart disease (CHD) [4]. Moreover, Vasan et al. showed that 
among the Framingham Heart Study’s participants, for individuals with BP in the 
upper-range of prehypertension, the risk for CVD was 2.5- and 1.6-fold higher 
among women and men, respectively, than in those with optimal BP (<120/80 mmHg) 
[5]. Furthermore, a recent meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies indicated that 
prehypertension was a predictor for cardiovascular events, suggesting subjects in 
the general population with prehypertension had a 55% and 17% increased risk of 
CVD and cardiovascular mortality [6]. Nonetheless, the vast majority, especially 
with stage 1 hypertension have a low absolute risk for CVD, which further ques-
tions the benefit of pharmacological treatment [7].
Therefore, all efforts are currently aimed at detection of at-risk individuals with 
prehypertension and means for preventing their progression to clinical hyperten-
sion. Risk scores have been developed for predicting the development of hyperten-
sion. The Strong Heart Study, a 12 year longitudinal study, showed baseline systolic 
BP, diabetes, and increased left ventricular mass were predictive for progression to 
hypertension in 38% of the 2629 prehypertensive participants [8].
In a recent longitudinal study among 569 healthy individuals, the cumulative 
6-year incidence of progression from normotension to prehypertension was 33.5%. 
The strongest significant predictors of prehypertension were early dysregulation of 
glucose metabolism and weight gain [9].
Because of these rates of progression, annual or biannual monitoring of BP in 
prehypertensive individuals has been suggested [9].
5.2  Strategies for Prevention of Hypertension
5.2.1  Nonpharmacological Approaches
To manage or reduce the risk of developing hypertension and to lower cardiovascu-
lar risk the established recommendations are termed “Health-promoting Lifestyle 
Modifications.” These include weight loss, dietary recommendations, and increased 
physical activity.
T. Rosenthal59
The final weight loss goal for individuals who are overweight or obese is to 
maintain a normal body weight (BMI, 18.5–24.9) [1]. The Trials of Hypertension 
Prevention assessed the efficacy of nonpharmacological interventions (weight loss, 
sodium restriction, and both interventions together) in a multicenter randomized 
study including 2383 adults with upper-range prehypertension (130/80 to 
139/89 mmHg) and BMI representing 110–165% of desirable body weight. Results 
showed the interventions were effective already in the short term; at 6-months fol-
low- up BP decreased by 3.7/2.7 mmHg, 2.9/1.6 mmHg, and 4.0/2.8 mmHg in the 
weight loss, sodium restriction, and combined groups, respectively. Moreover, dur -
ing the 4-year follow-up, 44% of the usual-care group that was prehypertensive at 
baseline progressed to hypertension while the three intervention groups showed a 
significantly reduced relative risk (0.78–0.82) of incident hypertension [10].
The PREMIER 6-month trial assessed the effects of multiple lifestyle interven-
tions based on established recommendations alone and with the addition of the 
Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) eating plan, which entails con-
suming a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, and low-fat dairy products with a reduced 
content of saturated and total fat. The study included 810 overweight/obese partici-
pants average age 50 years, with prehypertension to stage-1 hypertension. Results 
show that optimal BP control was achieved in 30–35% of the participants in both 
intervention groups. Further analysis of these results suggests that especially indi-
viduals with the metabolic syndrome may benefit in reduced BP levels by adopting 
the DASH diet [11].
Physical activity recommendations include engaging in a regular routine of aero-
bic physical activity, such as brisk walking (at least 30 min per day, most days of the 
week) [1 ]. An assessment of the benefits of physical activity by a submaximal tread-
mill exercise test showed the increased aerobic fitness among the PREMIER partici-
pants was associated with a reduced prevalence of the metabolic syndrome [12]. 
Physical fitness has also shown to have a protective effect on progression to hyper -
tension. A graded exercise test conducted in 2303 middle-aged older men with pre-
hypertension showed that within a median of 7.8 years low-fit individuals had a 66% 
increased risk for developing hypertension compared to high-fit individuals [13]. 
Another study included 43 prehypertensive young adults who were randomized to 2 
exercise training groups (resistance and endurance training) and a control group. The 
results show both types of exercise training showed effective in reducing BP and 
peripheral arterial stiffness and in improving resistance artery endothelial function 
and oxidant/ antioxidant balance in the young prehypertensive participants [14, 15].
Overall studies show engaging in intensive lifestyle interventions can achieve a 
20% reduced relative risk of incident hypertension [16].
5.2.2  Pharmacological Approaches
Angiotensin II has been recognized to play a deleterious role in the early course of 
the atherosclerotic process, thus highlighting the utility in blocking the renin- 
angiotensin system in patients with hypertension and/or type 2 diabetes with 5 Prehypertension and the Cardiometabolic Syndrome60
antihypertensive drugs as angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARB) and angiotensin 
converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) [17].
Prevalence rates of prehypertension in adults worldwide are 25–50%. 
Pharmacological treatment with a single antihypertensive medication can achieve 
a 34–66% reduced relative risk of progression to incident hypertension [16]. 
Moreover, early pharmacologic treatment in subjects with high-normal BP with 
concomitant comorbidities (diabetes, a cluster of cardiovascular risk factors, tar -
get organ damage, and metabolic syndrome) has shown beneficial for adequate 
BP control, which will further contribute to the prevention of cardiovascular com-
plications [18].
The PHARAO trial assessed whether progression to hypertension in prehyper -
tensive individuals can be prevented with pharmacological treatment with ACEi. 
Participants with BP in the upper range of prehypertension (BP 130–139 and/or 
85–89 mmHg) were randomly assigned to 3 years of treatment with Ramipril (505) 
or placebo (503). The results showed 43% of the group receiving placebo developed 
hypertension in 3 years. While participants receiving ACEi treatment achieved a 
34% reduced relative risk of incident hypertension over 3 years compared with pla-
cebo [19].
The TRial Of Preventing HYpertension (TROPHY) aimed at investigating 
whether pharmacological treatment of prehypertension with ARB prevents or post-
pones progression to clinical hypertension. Participants with BP in the upper range 
of prehypertension (BP 130–139 and/or 85–89 mmHg) were randomly assigned to 
2 years of treatment with candesartan (409) or placebo (400), followed by 2 years 
of placebo for all. The TROPHY study results show 63% of prehypertensive indi-
viduals aged 30–65 years receiving a placebo developed hypertension within 4 years 
and >40% after only 2 years [20]. An additional analysis following the new guide-
line definitions using 2 successive visits showing BP in the upper range of prehyper -
tension, after only 2 years 52% progressed to hypertension in the placebo group 
[21]. Moreover, participants on ARB medication achieved a 66% reduced risk of 
incident hypertension at 2 years compared with placebo, and 16% at 4 years (2 years 
after discontinuation of medication) [20].
The long-term effects of pharmacologic antihypertension therapy, specifically 
the impact of Health-related quality of life (HRQL—which evaluates the subjective 
patient experience using both physical and mental components), were assessed 
among the TROPY participants. The results showed the participants had a relatively 
high baseline HRQL which was maintained throughout the 2-year treatment period 
and the 4-year study period [22].
5.3  Early Detection of Prehypertension: Weight, Metabolic 
Syndrome, and Reduced eGFR
Early detection is aimed at risk stratification of a subset of individuals with prehy-
pertension who are at highest risk of progression to clinical hypertension.
T. Rosenthal61
Prehypertension has been associated with the metabolic syndrome. The meta-
bolic syndrome encompasses conditions characterized by various combinations of 
abnormalities in glucose metabolism, lipid metabolism, and blood pressure [2]. 
Indeed previous studies have found that not only is the metabolic syndrome associ-
ated with prehypertension, it may even precede the elevation in BP. This trend has 
been established worldwide. For example, a study conducted in China including 
1176 urban adults aged 40–70 years found a high prevalence of the metabolic syn-
drome (evident in lipid metabolism abnormalities) significantly associated with pre-
hypertension detected among these individuals [23].
Accordingly, many studies assessed the utility of early detection of components 
of the metabolic syndrome, such as weight gain and obesity, lipid metabolism 
abnormalities as elevated triglycerides, elevated LDL cholesterol, and low levels of 
HDL cholesterol; dysregulation of glucose metabolism, as insulin resistance and 
diabetes; and signs of subclinical organ damage as reduced estimated glomerular 
filtration rate (eGFR) and microalbuminuria and indeed found these associated to 
prehypertension.
A large study in Japan including 205,382 older adults aged 40–74 years found 
renal hyperfiltration, the sign of early stage renal damage, detected by reduced 
eGFR was associated with prehypertension and prediabetes in this large population 
cohort [24]. A registry study conducted in Spain including 19,041 adults showed 
prehypertension was associated to markers of insulin resistance assessed by the 
prevalence of the metabolic syndrome [25]. Similarly, two studies conducted in 
Taiwan and India found clinical characteristics of insulin resistance syndrome 
among nondiabetic individuals with prehypertension [26, 27]. While contradictory 
results regarding the association between prehypertension and insulin resistance 
were presented in a study conducted in Italy among 1384 healthy adults aged 
30–60 years [28].
5.4  The Cardiovascular Metabolic Syndrome
The interplay between a number of risk factors leading to CVD including insulin 
resistance-diabetes, obesity, endothelial dysfunction, and prehypertension has been 
termed the cardiovascular metabolic syndrome [29, 30].
The Strong Heart Study included 2629 normotensive participants followed for 
12 years. Compared to nondiabetic normotensive participants, the risk for develop-
ing incident CVD was 1.8-fold and 2.9-fold higher in participants with prehyperten-
sion or diabetes, respectively, with a 3.7-fold increased risk for those with both 
prehypertension and diabetes [31].
A prospective study included 2376 elderly Koreans, aged >60  years with a 
median follow-up for 7.6 years. The results showed that hypertensive subjects had a 
significantly increased risk for CVD mortality. Moreover, compared to normoten-
sive individuals, those with both hypertension and low levels of HDL cholesterol 
had a twofold higher risk of all-cause mortality [32].5 Prehypertension and the Cardiometabolic Syndrome62
The Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) Study 
included 3560 participants age 18–30 followed for 20 years. The results show pre-
hypertension developed in 18% of the cohort before 35 years and was associated 
with coronary atherosclerosis which is a strong predictor for CHD later in life [33].
Additionally, endothelial dysfunction was found to play a vital role in the pro-
gression of atherosclerosis. Diehl et al. employed a unique protocol to assess acute 
endothelial release of tissue type plasminogen activator (t-PA) in response to brady-
kinin. Their main finding was a considerably lower (−35%) release of t-PA in pre-
hypertensive men compared with normotensive men [34]. These findings confirm 
previous work by Hrafnkelsdottir et al. who demonstrated impaired t-PA release in 
hypertension, by showing that the onset of endothelial fibrinolytic dysfunction with 
elevated BP manifests in the prehypertensive state [35].
The endothelial consequences of prehypertension are considerable and cannot be 
overlooked. Along with findings of poor endothelial fibrinolytic capacity, prehyper -
tension is also characterized by reduced nitric oxide-mediated endothelium- 
dependent vasodilation, increased endothelin-1 vasoconstriction, increased arterial 
stiffness, and reduced endothelial repair [36].
Evidence has shown that large artery stiffening is one of the most important 
pathophysiological determinants of isolated systolic hypertension. Moreover, 
assessments of arterial stiffness have shown to have a predictive value for all-cause 
mortality and CV morbidity, in patients with essential hypertension [2].
Several prospective studies have identified increased arterial stiffness in prehy-
pertensive subjects as a risk factor for progression to hypertension. While long-term 
prehypertension may accelerate age-related increase of the arterial stiffness [37]. 
Suggesting that this vicious cycle towards development of hypertension may be 
further aggravated by additional CV risk factors as dysregulation of glucose metab-
olism and aging [38].
Prehypertension and left ventricular dysfunction were found significantly related 
to vascular inflammation and aortic stiffness, suggesting that an increased inflam-
matory process is involved in the pathophysiological mechanism of early cardiac 
and vascular alterations [39].
5.5  Pathophysiological Markers to Detect Risk 
for Prehypertension
Evidence suggests that inflammation may precede the elevation in BP contributing 
to the risk for incident hypertension. Using various inflammatory markers, a number 
of studies have found evidence that insulin resistance is associated with inflamma-
tion [29]. The ATTICA study, a cross-sectional population-based survey of 1514 
men and 1528 women, revealed an association between prehypertension and inflam-
matory markers (C-reactive protein (CRP), white blood cells (WBC), tumor necro-
sis factor-alpha (TNFα), amyloid-a and homocysteine) [40]. Additionally, a new 
analysis of the WBC counts in participants in the TROPHY trial revealed a 
T. Rosenthal63
significant independent association of WBC counts with baseline BMI and triglyc-
erides showing further evidence that obesity and insulin resistance are associated 
with inflammation [41].
More recent research has focused on early detection of additional pathophysio-
logical markers as serum complement c3 and serum uric acid that may precede the 
development of prehypertension and prediabetes. Evidence suggests that circulating 
serum complement c3 might serve as a signal for an immune process that may lead 
to the development of impaired glucose tolerance [42]. Two recent studies by the 
same group of investigators found evidence indicating that elevated serum c3 levels 
were significantly related to an increased risk of developing prediabetes [43], and 
prehypertension [44], in an adult population in China, thus suggesting the use of c3 
as a biomarker in high-risk individuals to improve primary prevention of these 
disorders.
A link has been established between highly elevated levels of serum uric acid 
(hyperuricemia) and CVD. Insight into the pathogenic mechanism of this associa-
tion has been demonstrated in animal studies. Rat studies have shown that hyperuri-
cemia induced both hypertension as well as endothelial dysfunction which may lead 
to CVD [45].
Therefore, early detection of elevated SUA levels may provide as a biomarker in 
individuals at risk of developing prehypertension. A prospective study conducted in 
Italy included 1156 young to middle-age participants with a median of 11.4 years 
follow-up. The results showed participants with highly elevated SUA levels had a 
31% increased risk of hypertension compared to those with low levels of 
SUA. Although SUA was an independent predictor of hypertension they also found 
that physical activity may counteract the pathophysiological mechanisms involved 
in the association between hyperuricemia and future hypertension [46]. While a 
study conducted in Brazil among 3412 individuals aged 35–74 years found elevated 
SUA levels were associated with prehypertension only among men [47].
A study among 4817 adults in Singapore found higher SUA levels were associ-
ated with prehypertension detected among the study cohort [48]. This association 
was further confirmed by a meta-analysis including 21,832 prehypertensive indi-
viduals which determined a positive association between elevated SUA levels and 
the risk of prehypertension in the general population [49].
 Conclusions
Hypertension is a major modifiable risk factor for cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality.
Nonpharmacological treatment interventions with lifestyle modifications 
(i.e., weight loss, increased physical activity, adopting the DASH diet) are rec-
ommended for all patients with prehypertension as these approaches were shown 
to effectively reduce the risk of CV events. Pharmacological antihypertensive 
treatment for prehypertensive individuals at increased risk of CV events due to 
concomitant comorbidities (obesity, diabetes, CV risk factors, target organ dam-
age, and metabolic syndrome) has shown beneficial for adequate BP control, in 5 Prehypertension and the Cardiometabolic Syndrome64
numerous clinical trials. Risk-stratified, patient-centered approach to the treat-
ment of prehypertension allows an informed, safe, and effective balance of life-
style and medication interventions to prevent incident hypertension and CVD.
The utility of early detection of various pathophysiological markers (inflam-
matory markers, endothelial dysfunction, increased arterial stiffness, elevated 
levels of serum complement c3 and SUA) has shown beneficial for individuals at 
high risk for developing the cardiovascular metabolic syndrome to improve pri-
mary prevention of prehypertension and prediabetes.
References
 1. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, et al. The seventh 
report of the joint national committee on prevention, detection, evaluation, and treatment of 
high blood pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003;289(19):2560–71.
 2. Mancia G. Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension: the Task Force for the 
Management of Arterial Hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of 
the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). J Hypertens. 2007;25:1105–87.
 3. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, Kannel WB, Levy D. Assessment of frequency of progression 
to hypertension in non-hypertensive participants in the Framingham Heart Study: a cohort 
study. Lancet. 2001;358(9294):1682–6.
 4. Shen L, Ma H, Xiang M-X, Wang J-A. Meta-analysis of cohort studies of baseline prehyper -
tension and risk of coronary heart disease. Am J Cardiol. 2013;112(2):266–71.
 5. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, Evans JC, O’donnell CJ, Kannel WB, et  al. Impact 
of high- normal blood pressure on the risk of cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 
2001;345(18):1291–7.
 6. Wang S, Wu H, Zhang Q, Xu J, Fan Y . Impact of baseline prehypertension on cardiovascular 
events and all-cause mortality in the general population: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort 
studies. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168(5):4857–60.
 7. McInnes G. Pre-hypertension: how low to go and do drugs have a role? Br J Clin Pharmacol. 
2012;73(2):187–93.
 8. De Marco M, De Simone G, Roman MJ, Chinali M, Lee ET, Russell M, et al. Cardiovascular 
and metabolic predictors of progression of prehypertension into hypertension. Hypertension. 
2009;54(5):974–80.
 9. Chobanian A V . Prehypertension revisited. Hypertension. 2006;48:812–4.
 10. Effects of weight loss and sodium reduction intervention on blood pressure and hypertension 
incidence in overweight people with high-normal blood pressure. The Trials of Hypertension 
Prevention, phase II. The Trials of Hypertension Prevention Collaborative Research Group. 
Arch Intern Med. 1997;157(6):657–67.
 11. Lien LF, Brown AJ, Ard JD, Loria C, Erlinger TP, Feldstein AC, et al. Effects of PREMIER 
lifestyle modifications on participants with and without the metabolic syndrome. Hypertension. 
2007;50(4):609–16.
 12. Crist LA, Champagne CM, Corsino L, Lien LF, Zhang G, Young DR. Influence of change 
in aerobic fitness and weight on prevalence of metabolic syndrome. Prev Chronic Dis. 
2012;9:E68.
 13. Faselis C, Doumas M, Kokkinos JP, Panagiotakos D, Kheirbek R, Sheriff HM, et al. Exercise 
capacity and progression from prehypertension to hypertension novelty and significance. 
Hypertension. 2012;60(2):333–8.
 14. Beck DT, Martin JS, Casey DP, Braith RW. Exercise training improves endothelial function in 
resistance arteries of young prehypertensives. J Hum Hypertens. 2014;28(5):303–9.
 15. Beck DT, Martin JS, Casey DP, Braith RW. Exercise training reduces peripheral arterial stiff-
ness and myocardial oxygen demand in young prehypertensive subjects. Am J Hypertens. 
2013;26(9):1093–102.
T. Rosenthal65
 16. Egan BM, Stevens-Fabry S. Prehypertension—prevalence, health risks, and management strat-
egies. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015;12(5):289–300.
 17. Schmieder RE, Hilgers KF, Schlaich MP, Schmidt BMW. Renin-angiotensin system and car -
diovascular risk. Lancet. 2007;369(9568):1208–19.
 18. Segura J, Ruilope LM. Treatment of prehypertension in diabetes and metabolic syndrome. 
Diabetes Care. 2009;32(Suppl 2):S284–9.
 19. Lüders S, Schrader J, Berger J, Unger T, Zidek W, Böhm M, et al. The PHARAO study: pre-
vention of hypertension with the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor ramipril in patients 
with high-normal blood pressure—a prospective, randomized, controlled prevention trial of 
the German Hypertension League. J Hypertens. 2008;26(7):1487–96.
 20. Julius S, Nesbitt S, Egan B, Kaciroti N, Schork MA, Grozinski M, et al. Trial of preventing 
hypertension. Hypertension. 2004;44(2):146–51.
 21. Julius S, Kaciroti N, Egan BM, Nesbitt S, Michelson EL, Trial of Preventing Hypertension 
(TROPHY) Investigators. TROPHY study: outcomes based on the seventh report of the 
joint National Committee on hypertension definition of hypertension. J Am Soc Hypertens. 
2008;2(1):39–43.
 22. Williams SA, Michelson EL, Cain V A, Yang M, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, et al. An evaluation 
of the effects of an angiotensin receptor blocker on health-related quality of life in patients 
with high-normal blood pressure (prehypertension) in the trial of preventing hypertension 
(TROPHY). J Clin Hypertens. 2008;10(6):436–42.
 23. Yao W, Sun Y , Wang X, Si Q, Chen H, Wan Z. High prevalence of metabolic syndrome in 
a middle-aged and elderly population with prehypertension in Tianjin. Clin Exp Hypertens. 
2015;37(5):369–74.
 24. Okada R, Yasuda Y , Tsushita K, Wakai K, Hamajima N, Matsuo S. The number of metabolic 
syndrome components is a good risk indicator for both early-and late-stage kidney damage. 
Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2014;24(3):277–85.
 25. Cordero A, Laclaustra M, León M, Grima A, Casasnovas JA, Luengo E, et al. Prehypertension 
is associated with insulin resistance state and not with an initial renal function impairment: 
a Metabolic Syndrome in Active Subjects in Spain (MESYAS) Registry substudy. Am J 
Hypertens. 2006;19(2):189–96.
 26. Hwu C-M, Liou T-L, Hsiao L-C, Lin M-W. Prehypertension is associated with insulin resis-
tance. QJM. 2009;102(10):705–11.
 27. Sathiyapriya V , Nandeesha H, Bobby Z, Pavithran P, Selvaraj N, Rattina DN. Insulin resis-
tance and enhanced protein glycation in men with prehypertension. Clin Chem Lab Med. 
2006;44(12):1457–61.
 28. Natali A, Muscelli E, Casolaro A, Nilsson P, Melander O, Lalic N, et  al. Metabolic char -
acteristics of prehypertension: role of classification criteria and gender. J Hypertens. 
2009;27(12):2394–402.
 29. Rana JS, Nieuwdorp M, Jukema JW, Kastelein JJP. Cardiovascular metabolic syndrome--an 
interplay of, obesity, inflammation, diabetes and coronary heart disease. Diabetes Obes Metab. 
2007;9(3):218–32.
 30. Duprez D, Toleuova A. Prehypertension and the cardiometabolic syndrome: pathological and 
clinical consequences. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2013;11(12):1725–33.
 31. Zhang Y , Lee ET, Devereux RB, Yeh J, Best LG, Fabsitz RR, et al. Prehypertension, dia-
betes, and cardiovascular disease risk in a population-based sample. Hypertension. 
2006;47(3):410–4.
 32. Kim NH, Cho HJ, Kim YJ, Cho MJ, Choi HY , Eun CR, et al. Combined effect of high-normal 
blood pressure and low HDL cholesterol on mortality in an elderly Korean population: the 
South-West Seoul (SWS) study. Am J Hypertens. 2011;24(8):918.
 33. Pletcher MJ, Bibbins-Domingo K, Lewis CE, Wei GS, Sidney S, Carr JJ, et al. Prehypertension 
during young adulthood and coronary calcium later in life. Ann Intern Med. 2008;149(2):91–9.
 34. Diehl KJ, Weil BR, Greiner JJ, Wright KP, Stauffer BL, DeSouza CA. Impaired endogenous 
fibrinolytic capacity in prehypertensive men. J Hum Hypertens. 2015;29(8):468–72.
 35. Hrafnkelsdóttir T, Wall U, Jern C, Jern S. Impaired capacity for endogenous fibrinolysis in 
essential hypertension. Lancet. 1998;352(9140):1597–8.5 Prehypertension and the Cardiometabolic Syndrome66
 36. Van Guilder GP. It is time to contend with the endothelial consequences of prehypertension. J 
Hum Hypertens. 2015;29(8):457.
 37. Patil SG, Aithala M, Das KK. Evaluation of arterial stiffness in elderly with prehypertension. 
Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 2015;59(1):16–22.
 38. Tomiyama H, Yamashina A. Arterial stiffness in prehypertension: a possible vicious cycle. J 
Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2012;5(3):280–6.
 39. Celik T, Yuksel UC, Fici F, Celik M, Yaman H, Kilic S, et al. Vascular inflammation and aortic 
stiffness relate to early left ventricular diastolic dysfunction in prehypertension. Blood Press. 
2013;22(2):94–100.
 40. Chrysohoou C, Pitsavos C, Panagiotakos DB, Skoumas J, Stefanadis C. Association between 
prehypertension status and inflammatory markers related to atherosclerotic disease: The 
ATTICA Study. Am J Hypertens. 2004;17(7):568–73.
 41. Julius S, Egan BM, Kaciroti NA, Nesbitt SD, Chen AK, TROPHY Investigators. In prehyper -
tension leukocytosis is associated with body mass index but not with blood pressure or incident 
hypertension. J Hypertens. 2014;32(2):251–9.
 42. Onat A, Can G, Rezvani R, Cianflone K. Complement C3 and cleavage products in cardio-
metabolic risk. Clin Chim Acta. 2011;412(13):1171–9.
 43. Bao X, Xia Y , Zhang Q, Wu HM, Du HM, Liu L, et al. Elevated serum complement C3 levels 
are related to the development of prediabetes in an adult population: the Tianjin Chronic Low- 
Grade Systematic Inflammation and Health Cohort Study. Diabet Med. 2016;33(4):446–53.
 44. Bao X, Meng G, Zhang Q, Liu L, Wu H, Du H, et al. Elevated serum complement C3 levels are 
associated with prehypertension in an adult population. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2017;39(1):42–9.
 45. Khosla UM, Zharikov S, Finch JL, Nakagawa T, Roncal C, Mu W, et  al. Hyperuricemia 
induces endothelial dysfunction. Kidney Int. 2005;67(5):1739–42.
 46. Saladini F, Mos L, Fania C, Garavelli G, Casiglia E, Palatini P.  Regular physical activity 
prevents development of hypertension in young people with hyperuricemia. J Hypertens. 
2017;35(5):994–1001.
 47. Lotufo PA, Baena CP, Santos IS, Bensenor IM. Serum uric acid and prehypertension among 
adults free of cardiovascular diseases and diabetes: baseline of the Brazilian longitudinal study 
of adult health (ELSA-Brasil). Angiology. 2016;67(2):180–6.
 48. Syamala S, Li J, Shankar A. Association between serum uric acid and prehypertension among 
US adults. J Hypertens. 2007;25(8):1583–9.
 49. Jiang M, Gong D, Fan Y . Serum uric acid levels and risk of prehypertension: a meta-analysis. 
Clin Chem Lab Med. 2017;55(3):314–21.
T. Rosenthal67 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_6
S. Gulec ( *) · C. Erol 
Cardiology Department, Medical School of Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey
e-mail: sgulec@ankara.edu.tr6Prehypertension: Definition 
and Epidemiology
Sadi Gulec and Cetin Erol
6.1  Definition of Prehypertension
Prehypertension is a term used to describe a condition of increased blood pressure 
(BP) which falls short of a formal definition of hypertension yet confers an increased 
risk of progression to hypertension and/or cardiovascular disease. The word itself 
has been first introduced in 2003, when Joint National Committee on Prevention, 
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure issued its seventh 
report (JNC-7) [1]. The report set the threshold for a normal blood pressure reading 
lower than ever before, at 120/80 millimeters of mercury (mmHg), and it also estab-
lished a new diagnostic category of “prehypertension” for those with BPs ranging 
from 120–139  mmHg systolic and/or 80–89  mmHg diastolic. Prehypertension 
emerged from the fusion of two categories employed by the JNC-6: high-normal BP 
(130–139/85–89 mmHg) and normal BP (120–129/80–84 mmHg). The decision to 
establish this new BP category was based on a number of factors. Framingham 
Heart Study investigators had reported the lifetime risk of hypertension to be 
approximately 90 percent in individuals whose BP was normal at age 55 years [2]. 
Furthermore, a meta-analysis of 61 prospective studies had shown that mortality 
from ischemic heart disease and stroke in individuals aged 40–89 years increases in 
a log-linear relationship with BP, from levels as low as 115 mmHg systolic and 
75 mmHg diastolic [3]. In addition, a WHO report had indicated that about 62% of 
cerebrovascular disease and 49% of ischemic heart disease were attributable to sub-
optimal blood pressure (systolic blood pressure >115 mmHg) globally [4]. However, 
the 2003 European Society of Hypertension-European Society of Cardiology (ESH/
ESC) guidelines [5] as well as the 2003 World Health Organization/International 68
Society of Hypertension (WHO/ISH) Statement on management of hypertension 
[6] did not share JNC-7’s view. The point of objection was the inhomogeneity 
within the prehypertension category in terms of cardiovascular risk. Individuals 
with BP 130–139/85–89 mmHg were more likely to progress to hypertensive values 
and to develop cardiovascular disease when compared to those with BP 
120–129/80–84 mmHg.
The JNC-7 guidelines made clear that prehypertension was not a disease cate-
gory and that people labeled prehypertensive should not be treated with drugs. 
Rather, it was a new designation intended to identify those individuals in whom 
early intervention by adoption of healthy lifestyle modifications could reduce BP, 
decrease the rate of progression to clinical hypertension with age, or to prevent 
hypertension entirely. Although lifestyle modifications have been shown to reduce 
BP and retard the development of manifest hypertension [7–9], people are reluctant 
to adopt healthy behaviors [10]. Even a past heart attack does not seem to encourage 
patients sufficient enough to adopt healthy lifestyle modifications. In PURE study 
[11], we found that the prevalence of healthy lifestyle behaviors among patients 
with a CHD or stroke event from countries with varying income levels was less than 
5%. Another source of concern for prehypertension was that dealing with large 
numbers of prehypertensive individuals might place excessive burdens on physi-
cians who already are having difficulty managing hypertensive patients.
Recently, several national and international guidelines for the management of 
hypertension have been published [12–17]. When these guidelines are reviewed and 
compared with respect to BP classification, significant discrepancies have been 
noted in nomenclature (Table 6.1). There appears to be three different approaches 
for classifying BP when it is in the range of 120–139/80–89 mmHg. First one is to 
call them all “prehypertensive” as suggested by JNC-7 and ASH/ISH [12] guide-
lines. Second one is to call them “normal” if it is 120–129/ 80–84  mmHg, and 
“high-normal” if it is 130–139/85–89  mmHg. European [13], Canadian [14], 
Australian [15], and Japanese [16] guidelines use this approach. The third and final 
approach is to ignore them, or call them all “normal” as it is in the British NICE 
Table 6.1 Blood pressure classifications in various hypertension guidelines for values of 
<140/90 mmHg
Guidelines Classifications Systolic BP (mmHg) Diastolic BP (mmHg)
JNC-7, 2003
ASH/ISH, 2013Prehypertension
Normal120–139
<12080–89
<80
ESH/ESC, 2013
JSH, 2014
NHFA, 2016
CHEP, 2017Optimal <120 <80
Normal 120–129 80–84
High-normal 130–139 80–84
NICE, 2011 (Updated in 2016) Normal <140 <90
ASH/ISH American Society of Hypertension/International Society of Hypertension, CHEP 
Canadian Hypertension Education Program, ESH/ESC European Society of Hypertension/
European Society of Cardiology, JNC-7 Seventh Joint National Committee, JSH Japanese Society 
of Hypertension, NHFA National Heart Foundation of Australia, NICE National Institute for 
Clinical Excellence
S. Gulec and C. Erol69
guidelines [17]. Accordingly, if you have a blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, it will 
be named as “prehypertension” in USA, “high-normal” in Europe, and “normal” in 
England. Guidelines like JNC, ESH/ESC, and NICE, are recognized by many phy-
sicians from different countries who do not have their own national guidelines. It 
should be noted that these physicians feel confused and unmotivated because of the 
disagreements between credible guidelines on major topics [18]. We wish develop-
ers of these guidelines would cooperate and make a consensus paper regarding these 
issues.
Currently, little is known about how often physicians use the prehypertension 
classification when treating patients, and how patients recall and respond to this 
information. Researchers from School of Medicine, University of North Carolina, 
conducted a trial [19] aiming to estimate how often patients with prehypertension 
are being told about it by their primary care physicians. Participants were asked to 
indicate whether a doctor or other health care provider had ever told them they had 
“prehypertension” (Yes/ No); a subsample of patients with measured BP in the pre-
hypertension range was asked the same question. Of 1008 non-hypertensive patients, 
1.9% indicated being told they had prehypertension. Among a subsample of 102 
patients with measured BP in the prehypertension range, 2.0% indicated being told 
they had prehypertension. This data may suggest physicians are reluctant to tell 
patients they have prehypertension and do not talk about lifestyle modification. One 
other explanation is that, clinicians counsel patients about lifestyle modifications 
that will reduce their chances of developing hypertension without labeling them 
with prehypertension. There, actually, is a claim that being labeled prehypertensive 
may have unintended negative consequences that could limit the potential benefits 
of early identification of elevated BP. Increases in work absenteeism [20], higher 
levels of physical symptoms [21], and lower health-related quality of life [22] have 
been reported among patients who are aware of their hypertension status compared 
with those who are hypertensive but unaware of the diagnosis. Negative outcomes 
are not explained by BP elevation itself or by drug treatment, suggesting that psy-
chological effects of being labeled likely play a significant role. Viera et al. [23], 
examined whether the label of prehypertension exerts a negative effect on patients’ 
perceived health and whether it motivates people to adopt lifestyle recommenda-
tions to prevent hypertension. They randomized 97 newly diagnosed prehyperten-
sive adults to either a labeling message or a generic (no label) message. Those in the 
“label” group received a standardized message delivered by a trained research assis-
tant. The participant was told that he/she had prehypertension; that was followed by 
a description of various lifestyle recommendations. Within the message the term 
“prehypertension” was mentioned several times. Those in the “no label” group 
received a very similar standardized message about lifestyle modifications without 
any mention of prehypertension. At 3 months there were no differences in reports of 
changing eating habits, cutting down on salt, reducing alcohol intake, or exercising 
to try to prevent hypertension. Perception of health parameters was also not differ -
ent at the end of the follow-up. Being labeled as prehypertensive seems to exert 
neither harmful nor helpful effects. In a similar study, Spruill et al. [24] evaluated 
the effects of labeling individuals with prehypertension on BP and health-related 6 Prehypertension: Definition and Epidemiology70
quality of life. They randomly assigned 100 patients to either a “Labeled” group in 
which they were informed of their prehypertension, or an “Unlabeled” group in 
which they were not informed. Subjects underwent office BP measurement, 24 h 
ambulatory BP monitoring and completed self-report questionnaires at baseline and 
3 months. Their findings suggest that labeling patients with prehypertension does 
not have negative effects on BP or quality of life, at least in the short term. Thus, few 
studies with limited number patients suggest that prehypertension labeling may not 
be harmful to patients. It is also not particularly helpful. Studies are needed to deter -
mine approaches to communicate with prehypertensive patients that will increase 
the likelihood of lifestyle change and lead to improved health outcomes.
6.2  Diagnosis of Prehypertension
Blood pressure screening is sine qua non for the early diagnosis of hypertension. 
However, the diagnosis process is much more complex than it looks. Consider a 
patient with an office BP of >140/90 mmHg. Is this patient hypertensive? Indeed, 
confirmation of the initial BP by subsequent measurement(s) is needed before a 
patient can be diagnosed as hypertensive. According to the JNC-7, and the ESH/
ESC guidelines, BP classification should be based on the average of at least two 
properly measured, seated BP readings on each of at least two office visits. However, 
according to the CHEP, five visits with average BPs of >140 and/or >90 mmHg is 
needed to label a patient as hypertensive. On the other hand, NICE asks physicians 
to perform ambulatory BP monitoring to confirm the diagnosis of hypertension. If a 
person is unable to tolerate ambulatory BP monitoring, home BP monitoring of at 
least 4 days is recommended as a suitable alternative to confirm the diagnosis of 
hypertension. Indeed, out-of-office BP measurement currently remains the “gold 
standard” for screening, diagnosis, and management of hypertension. It is crucial 
for the diagnosis of white-coat effect and masked hypertension. Actual guidelines 
have proposed that levels of the self-measured BP at home of 135 mmHg systolic or 
85 mmHg diastolic or higher and/or 24 h ambulatory BP of 130 mmHg systolic or 
80 mmHg diastolic or higher indicate hypertension. However, out-of-office thresh-
olds for prehypertension and/or high-normal BP has not been identified in any of the 
existing guidelines. This may cause confusion in daily practice. For example, if a 
patient has an average office BP of 130/80 mmHg, you may call it prehypertension. 
What if the average home BP of the same patient is 115/75 mmHg? Does he/she 
really have prehypertension? Or should we call it “white-coat prehypertension” 
(i.e., prehypertension at office and normotension at home). As another example, 
what if the office BP is 110/70 mmHg, while the home BP is 130/80 mmHg? Should 
we call it “masked prehypertension”? (i.e., normotension at office and prehyperten-
sion at home). Recently, Niiranen et  al. [25] conducted a trial to determine an 
outcome- driven reference frame for home BP measurement based on individual 
participant data that includes all existing population cohorts with fatal and nonfatal 
outcomes available for analysis. They measured home and clinic BP in 6470 partici-
pants, and calculated the home BP levels that yielded 10-year absolute risks of 
S. Gulec and C. Erol71
cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, or cardiac events similar to those associated with 
stages 1 (120–129/80–84) and 2 (130–139/85–89) prehypertension on clinic BP 
measurement. The rounded thresholds amounted to 120/75 and 125/80  mmHg, 
respectively. Head et  al. [26] evaluated 8575 patients to derive ambulatory BP 
equivalents to clinic BP thresholds for diagnosis of different stages of hypertension. 
Their analysis has shown that the closer the patient’s BP is to normal levels, the 
closer is the agreement between daytime ambulatory and clinic BP. On the other 
hand, the higher the BP, the greater the difference between ambulatory and clinic 
BP. The daytime systolic/diastolic ambulatory BP equivalent to the lower limit of 
grade 1 or mild hypertension (140/90) was estimated to be 4/3 mmHg lower (136/87) 
than clinic values; the estimate for grade 2 hypertension (160/100) was 8/4 mmHg 
lower (152/96) and for grade 3 hypertension (180/100) was 12/6  mmHg lower 
(168/105). Based on this data, systolic/diastolic ambulatory BP equivalent to the 
lower limit of prehypertension can be expected to be similar or slightly lower than 
that of the office value of 120/80 mmHg. More data are needed to identify home and 
ambulatory BP thresholds for prehypertension.
6.3  Epidemiology of Prehypertension
6.3.1  Prevalence
Numerous epidemiologic studies from different countries have documented the 
prevalence of prehypertension. Data from the 2011 and 2012 National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III) suggested that the prevalence of pre-
hypertension among adults in the United States was approximately 28% [27]. 
Reported prevalence of prehypertension for some other countries were as follows: 
China 36.4% [28], Japan 33% [29], India 33.2% [30], UK 43.9% [31], Canada 
27.2% [31], Netherlands 32.8% [32] sub-Saharan Africa 29.8%, [33], Brazil 36.1% 
[34], Belarus 34.3% [35], and Iran 47.3% [36]. Variations in the BP measurement 
methodology, age range of study participants, exclusion of individuals with hyper -
tension in some cohorts and the standard population chosen for age adjustment 
made direct comparisons of the studies difficult. In a systematic review and meta- 
analysis of 20 cross-sectional and 6 longitudinal studies, the overall prevalence of 
prehypertension was 36% [37]. In accordance, PURE (Prospective Urban and Rural 
Epidemiological) study [38], assessing 153,996 individuals in 17 countries, found 
the prevalence of prehypertension as 36.8% (unpublished data). It turns out that a 
huge number of people in any given population are actually people with 
prehypertension.
Recently, data on the temporal changes in the prevalence of prehypertension and 
hypertension have also been published. A systematic analysis of population-based 
studies from 90 countries showed that the prevalence of hypertension decreased by 
2.6% in high-income countries but increased by 7.7% in low- and middle-income 
countries from 2000 to 2010 [39]. It has been suggested that aging and urbanization 
with accompanying unhealthy lifestyle may play a role in the epidemic of 6 Prehypertension: Definition and Epidemiology72
hypertension in low- and middle-income countries. Evaluation of two cross-sec-
tional surveys conducted with participants aged >60 years in the same district in 
Beijing, China, and using the same methods in both 2001 and 2010 showed that the 
prevalence of prehypertension decreased, whereas the prevalence of hypertension 
increased with increasing age [40]. This finding was consistent with previous stud-
ies [41]. The explanation was that by this age most of the people with prehyperten-
sion would have already developed full-blown hypertension. On the other hand, 
according to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys between 1999 
and 2012, the percentage of US adults with prehypertension decreased from 31.2 to 
28.2% without any increase in the rate of hypertension [27].
6.3.2  Distribution of Prehypertension by Age,  
Sex, and Race or Ethnicity
According to the WHO Global Health Observatory reports 2015 (last updated 
2017.01.11) [42] the global estimates of age standardized (+18 years old) preva-
lence of hypertension was 24.1% in men and 20.1% in women while age standard-
ized mean systolic BP was 127.0 and 122.3 mmHg, respectively. Hypertension 
was more common in males than females in nearly all countries for which data 
were available, with few exceptions (i.e., Ireland, Tajikistan, and Turkey) where 
the prevalence was the same in both sexes. Like hypertension, prehypertension 
has been found to be more prevalent among men than among women [43]. Gender 
differences in the distribution of prehypertension and hypertension seem to vary 
from culture to culture, which implies an interaction between social and biologi-
cal mechanisms. The prevalence of prehypertension increases with age in both 
genders, except for those >60  years of age because of a higher prevalence of 
hypertension [44].
In terms of race/ethnic variables, multiethnic comparison studies on prevalence 
have produced contradictory evidence. Reasons for Geographic and Racial 
Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) study (n = 5553 individuals with prehyperten-
sion) [45] found that the prevalence of prehypertension was higher in African- 
American participants across all age and gender strata. In line with them, The 
Bogalusa Heart Study [46] indicated that prehypertension prevalence was higher 
among black compared to white participants. In the Women’s Health Initiative study 
[47], however, prehypertension was present in 39.5%, 32.1%, 42.6%, 38.7%, and 
40.3% of white, black, Hispanic, American Indian, and Asian women, respectively 
(P  =  0.0001 across ethnic groups). The Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis 
(MESA) study [48] investigated the age-specific incidence of hypertension by eth-
nicity for 3146 participants. After adjustment for age, sex, and study site, the inci-
dence rate ratio for hypertension was increased for blacks age 45–74 years compared 
with whites. Hispanic participants also had a higher incidence of hypertension com-
pared with whites; however, hypertension incidence did not differ for Chinese and 
white participants. On the other hand, NHANES III found no difference in the 
S. Gulec and C. Erol73
prevalence between Non-Hispanic whites, Non-Hispanic blacks, Mexican 
Americans, or others [49]. Recent study from China [50], a multi-ethnic country, 
where minorities have their specific dietary habits and lifestyles, which could influ-
ence their blood pressure status, demonstrated that prevalence of prehypertension 
was statistically different between ethnicities. A study from Europe [32] demon-
strated that the prevalence of prehypertension did not differ between the ethnic 
groups in men African Surinamese and Hindustani Surinamese women, however, 
had a higher prevalence of prehypertension than White Dutch women.
6.3.3  Incidence
Much less is known about the incidence of newly developed prehypertension than 
about its prevalence. In a Middle East population-based cohort, during a median 
follow-up of 9.2 years about half of the individuals who were normotensive at 
baseline had progressed to prehypertension [51]. Progression was more promi-
nent among men. In a subpopulation of Women’s Health Initiative, 3 years inci-
dence of prehypertension was 27.3% among Hispanic women [52]. Very recently, 
Hardy et al. [53] studied age, racial/ethnic, and sex-specific annual net transition 
probabilities between categories of BP using three NHANES cross-sectional sam-
ples. From ages 8 to 30 years, annual net transition probabilities from normal BP 
to prehypertension among male individuals were more than two times the net 
transition probabilities of their female counterparts. The largest net transition 
probabilities for ages 8–30 years occurred in African American young men, while 
Mexican American young women aged 8–30 years experienced the lowest normal 
to prehypertension transition. After age 40 years, normal BP to prehypertension 
net transition probabilities stabilized or decreased for men, whereas increased 
rapidly for women. Mexican American women exhibited the largest normal to 
prehypertension net transition probabilities after age 60 years. Authors suggest 
that primordial prevention beginning in childhood and into early adulthood is 
necessary to preempt the development of prehypertension as well as associated 
racial/ethnic and sex disparities.
6.3.4  Associated Risk Factors
Like hypertension, prehypertension tends to cluster with other cardiovascular risk 
factors such as dyslipidemia, obesity, and diabetes mellitus [54, 55]. It has been 
shown that almost 90% of individuals with prehypertension have at least one other 
traditional cardiovascular risk factor [56]. Association with inflammation [57], 
microalbuminuria [58], income status, education level, diet [28, 59, 60], and living 
in an urban or rural area [60] also have been reported with contradictory results. 
Prehypertension and associated metabolic risk factors will be discussed in detail 
elsewhere in this book.6 Prehypertension: Definition and Epidemiology74
References
 1. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. The seventh report of the joint national committee 
on prevention, detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood pressure: the JNC 7 report. 
JAMA. 2003;289:2560–71.
 2. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, et al. Assessment of frequency of progression to hyperten-
sion in non- hypertensive participants in the Framingham Heart Study: a cohort study. Lancet. 
2001;358:1682–6.
 3. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, et al. Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to 
vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 prospective 
studies. Lancet. 2002;360:1903–13.
 4. World Health Report 2002. Reducing risks, promoting healthy life. http://www.who.int/
whr/2002/ Accessed 27 June 2017.
 5. European Society of Hypertension-European Society of Cardiology Guidelines Committee. 
European Society of Hypertension-European Society of Cardiology guidelines for the man-
agement of arterial hypertension. J Hypertens. 2003;21:1011–53.
 6. World Health Organization /International Society of Hypertension Writing group. 2003 World 
Health Organization (WHO)/International Society of Hypertension (ISH) statement on man-
agement of hypertension. J Hypertens. 2003;21:1983–92.
 7. Appel LJ, Champagne CM, Harsha DW, et al. Writing Group of the PREMIER Collaborative 
Research Group. Effects of comprehensive lifestyle modification on blood pressure control: 
main results of the PREMIER clinical trial. JAMA. 2003;289:2083–93.
 8. Prather AA, Blumenthal JA, Hinderliter AL, Sherwood A. Ethnic differences in the effects 
of the DASH diet on nocturnal blood pressure in individuals with high blood pressure. Am J 
Hypertens. 2011;24:1338–44.
 9. Faselis C, Doumas M, Kokkinos JP, et al. Exercise capacity and progression from prehyperten-
sion to hypertension. Hypertension. 2012;60:333–8.
 10. Greenlund KJ, Daviglus ML, Croft JB. Differences in healthy lifestyle characteristics between 
adults with prehypertension and normal blood pressure. J Hypertens. 2009;27:955–62.
 11. Teo K, Lear S, Islam S, et al; on behalf of PURE Study Investigators. Prevalence of a healthy 
lifestyle among individuals with cardiovascular disease in high-, middle- and low-income 
countries the Prospective Urban Rural Epidemiology (PURE) study. JAMA. 2013;310:959–68.
 12. Weber MA, Schiffrin EL, White WB, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of 
hypertension in the community a statement by the American Society of Hypertension and the 
International Society of Hypertension. J Hypertens. 2014;32:3–15.
 13. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, et  al. The Task Force for the management of arterial 
hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of 
Cardiology (ESC). 2013 ESH/ESC guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension. 
Eur Heart J. 2013;34:2159–219.
 14. Leung AA, Daskalopoulou SS, Dasgupta K, et al. Hypertension Canada’s 2017 guidelines for 
diagnosis, risk assessment, prevention and treatment of hypertension in adults. Can J Cardiol. 
2017;33:557–76.
 15. Gabb GM, Mangoni AA, Anderson CS, et al. Guideline for the diagnosis and management of 
hypertension in adults, 2016. Med J Aust. 2016;205:85–9.
 16. Shimamoto K, Ando K, Fujita T, et  al. Japanese Society of Hypertension Committee for 
Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension: the Japanese Society of Hypertension 
Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension (JSH 2014). Hypertens Res. 2014;37:253–387.
 17. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Hypertension: clinical management of 
primary hypertension in adults (Clinical guideline 127). http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG127. 
Accessed 27 June 2017.
 18. Gulec S. Early diagnosis saves lives: focus on patients with hypertension. Kidney Int Suppl. 
2013;3:332–4.
 19. Viera AJ, Bangura F, Mitchell CM, et al. Do clinicians tell patients they have prehypertension? 
J Am Board Fam Med. 2011;24:117–8.
S. Gulec and C. Erol75
 20. Haynes RB, Sackett DL, Taylor DW, et al. Increased absenteeism from work after detection 
and labeling of hypertensive patients. N Engl J Med. 1978;299:741–4.
 21. Stewart JC, France CR, Sheffield D. Hypertension awareness and pain reports: data from the 
NHANES III. Ann Behav Med. 2003;26:8–14.
 22. Barger SD, Muldoon MF.  Hypertension labelling was associated with poorer self-rated 
health in the Third US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. J Hum Hypertens. 
2006;20:117–23.
 23. Viera AJ, MD MPH, et al. Effects of labeling patients as prehypertensive. J Am Board Fam 
Med. 2010;23:571–83.
 24. Spruill TM, Feltheimer SD, Harlapur M, et al. Are there consequences of labeling patients 
with prehypertension? An experimental study of effects on blood pressure and quality of life. 
J Psychosom Res. 2013;74:433–8.
 25. Niiranen TJ, Asayama K, Thijs L, et al. for the International Database of HOme blood pres-
sure in relation to Cardiovascular Outcome Investigators. Outcome-driven thresholds for home 
blood pressure measurement international database of home blood pressure in relation to car -
diovascular outcome. Hypertension. 2013;61:27–34.
 26. Head GA, Mihailidou AS, Duggan KA, et al. Definition of ambulatory blood pressure targets 
for diagnosis and treatment of hypertension in relation to clinic blood pressure: prospective 
cohort study. BMJ. 2010;340:c1104.
 27. Booth JN, Li J, Zhang L, et al. Trends in prehypertension and hypertension risk factors in US 
adults1999–2012. Hypertension. 2017;70(2):275–84.
 28. Meng XJ, Dong GH, Wang D, et al. Epidemiology of prehypertension and associated risk 
factors in urban adults from 33 communities in China—The CHPSNE Study. Circ J. 
2012;76:900–6.
 29. Ishikawa Y , Ishikawa L, Ishikawa S, et al. for the JMS Cohort Investigators Group. Prevalence 
and determinants of prehypertension in a Japanese general population: The Jichi Medical 
School Cohort Study. Hypertens Res. 2008;31:1323–30.
 30. Gupta R, Deedwania PC, Achari V , et al. Normotension, prehypertension, and hypertension 
in urban middle-class subjects in India: prevalence, awareness, treatment, and control. Am J 
Hypertens. 2013;26:83–94.
 31. Joffres M, Falaschetti E, Gillespie C, et al. Hypertension prevalence, awareness, treatment and 
control in national surveys from England, the USA and Canada, and correlation with stroke 
and ischaemic heart disease mortality: a cross-sectional study. BMJ Open. 2013;3:e003423. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003423.
 32. Agyemang C, van Valkengoed I, van den Born BJ, Stronks K.  Prevalence and determi-
nants of prehypertension among African Surinamese, Hindustani Surinamese, and White 
Dutch in Amsterdam, the Netherlands: The SUNSET study. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 
2007;14:775–81.
 33. Guwatudde D, Nankya-Mutyoba J, Kalyesubula R, et al. The burden of hypertension in sub- 
Saharan Africa: a four-country cross sectional study. BMC Public Health. 2015;15:1211. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-015-2546-z.
 34. Silva DA, Petroski EL, Peres MA, et  al. Prehypertension and hypertension among adults 
in a metropolitan area in southern Brazil: population-based study. Rev Saude Publica. 
2012;46:988–98.
 35. Podpalov V , Stchastlivenko AI, Zhurova ON, et al. Prevalence of prehypertension, hyperten-
sion and cardiovascular risk factors in a Belarus urban population. Eur Heart J. 2013;34(Suppl 
1):5960.
 36. Tabrizi JS, Bazargani HS, Farahbakhsh M, et al. Prevalence and associated factors of prehyper -
tension and hypertension in Iranian population: Lifestyle Promotion Project (LPP). PLos One. 
2016. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0165264.
 37. Guo X, Zou L, Zhang X, et al. Prehypertension: a meta-analysis of the epidemiology, risk fac-
tors, and predictors of progression. Tex Heart Inst J. 2011;38:643–52.
 38. Teo K, Chow CK, Vaz M, et al. The Prospective Urban Rural Epidemiology (PURE) study. Am 
Heart J. 2009;158:1–7.6 Prehypertension: Definition and Epidemiology76
 39. Mills KT, Bundy JD, Kelly TN, et  al. Global disparities of hypertension prevalence and 
control a systematic analysis of population-based studies from 90 countries. Circulation. 
2016;134:441–50.
 40. Wu L, He Y , Jiang B, et  al. Trends in prevalence, awareness, treatment and control of 
hypertension during 2001–2010  in an urban elderly population of China. PLoS One. 
2015;10(8):e0132814. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0132814.
 41. Chiu YH, Wu SC, Tseng CD, et  al. Progression of pre-hypertension, stage 1 and 2  
hypertension (JNC 7): a population-based study in Keelung, Taiwan (Keelung Community-
based Integrated Screening No. 9). J Hypertens. 2006;24:821–8.
 42. WHO Global Observatory data. http://apps.who.int/gho/data/view.
main.12467GLOBAL?lang=en. Accessed 22 June 2017.
 43. Grotto I, Grossman E, Huerta M, Sharabi Y . Prevalence of prehypertension and associated 
cardiovascular risk profiles among young Israeli adults. Hypertension. 2006;48:254–9.
 44. Wang Y , Wang QJ.  The prevalence of prehypertension and hypertension among US adults 
according to the new Joint National Committee guidelines. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164:2126–34.
 45. Glasser SP, Judd S, Basile J, et al. Prehypertension, racial prevalence and association with risk 
factors: analysis of the REasons for Geographic And Racial Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) 
Study. Am J Hypertens. 2011;24:194–9.
 46. Toprak A, Wang H, Chen W, et al. Prehypertension and black-white contrasts in cardiovascular 
risk in young adults: Bogalusa heart study. J Hypertens. 2009;27:243–50.
 47. Hsia J, Margolis KL, Eaton CB, et  al. for the Women’s Health Initiative Investigators. 
Prehypertension and cardiovascular disease risk in the Women’s Health Initiative. Circulation. 
2007;115:855–60.
 48. Carson AP, Howard G, Burke GL. Ethnic differences in hypertension incidence among middle- 
aged and older adults the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis. Hypertension. 2011;57:1101–7.
 49. Gu Q, Burt VL, Paulose-Ram R, et al. High blood pressure and cardiovascular disease mor -
tality risk among U.S. adults: the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
mortality follow-up study. Ann Epidemiol. 2008;18:302–9.
 50. Xu T, Liu J, Zhu G, et al. Prevalence of prehypertension and associated risk factors among 
Chinese adults from a large-scale multi-ethnic population survey. BMC Public Health. 
2016;16:775. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-016-3411-4.
 51. Hadaegh F, Hasheminia M, Abdi H et al. (2015) Prehypertension Tsunami: a decade follow-up 
of an Iranian adult population. PLoS One. 10(10):e0139412. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0139412.
 52. Zambrana RE, López L, Dinwiddie GY , et al. Prevalence and incident prehypertension and 
hypertension in postmenopausal Hispanic women: results from the Women’s Health Initiative. 
Am J Hypertens. 2014;27:372–81.
 53. Hardy ST, Holliday KM, Chakladar S, et al. Heterogeneity in blood pressure transitions over 
the life course. Age-specific emergence of racial/ethnic and sex disparities in the United States. 
JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:653. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2017.0652.
 54. Gupta AK, McGlone M, Greenway FL, Johnson WD. Prehypertension in disease-free adults: 
a marker for an adverse cardiometabolic risk profile. Hypertens Res. 2010;33:905–10.
 55. Greenlund KJ, Croft JB, Mensah GA.  Prevalence of heart disease and stroke risk fac-
tors in persons with prehypertension in the United States, 1999–2000. Arch Intern Med. 
2004;164:2113–8.
 56. Mainous AG 3rd, Everett CJ, Liszka H, et al. Prehypertension and mortality in a nationally 
representative cohort. Am J Cardiol. 2004;94:1496–500.
 57. Chrysohoou C, Pitsavos C, Panagiotakos DB, et al. Association between prehypertension sta-
tus and inflammatory markers related to atherosclerotic disease: The ATTICA Study. Am J 
Hypertens. 2004;17:568–73.
S. Gulec and C. Erol77
 58. Navarro-gonzález JF, Mora C, Muros M, et al. Relationship between inflammation and micro-
albuminuria in prehypertension. J Hum Hypertens. 2013;27:119–25.
 59. Yang G, Ma Y , Wang S, et al. Prevalence and correlates of prehypertension and hypertension 
among adults in Northeastern China: a cross sectional study. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 
2016;13:82. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13010082.
 60. Hu L, Huang X, You C, et al. Prevalence and risk factors of prehypertension and hyperten-
sion in Southern China. PLoS One. 2017;12(1):e0170238. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0170238.6 Prehypertension: Definition and Epidemiology79 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_7
7Prehypertension, Statistics and Health 
Burden
Andrzej Januszewicz and Aleksander Prejbisz
7.1  Introduction
The decision to establish prehypertension, the new blood pressure category, was 
based on the number of factors and highlighted the relevance of the observational 
studies in adults between 40 and 80 years of age. They indicated that the risk of 
cardiovascular disease [CVD] increased progressively beginning from levels as low 
as 115/75 mmHg upward with doubling of the incidence of both coronary heart 
disease [CHD] and stroke for every 20/10 mmHg increment of systolic and diastolic 
BP [1, 2].
As indicated by several studies since the population continues to age in most 
countries worldwide and BP increases with age, clinical practice focused on hyper -
tension care becomes more relevant. Therefore designation of prehypertension was 
established to focus attention on the segment of the population representing higher-
than-normal CVD risk and whom therapeutic approaches to prevent or delay the 
onset of hypertension would be of value [3–5].
Since release of the Seventh Joint National Committee on the Prevention, 
Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of Hypertension [JNC-7] report in 2003, new 
data provided a compelling argument for using the concept of prehypertension and 
focusing attention on the range of systolic blood pressure of 120–139 mmHg and 
diastolic BP between 80 and 89 mmHg as having clinical and public health signifi-
cance [6].
Many reports and articles has been published on prehypertension over the past 
decade and new data have been provided on the prevalence, the rate of progression 
to hypertension, association with other cardiovascular risk factors and its relation-
ship to the development of cardiovascular disease. It has been clearly documented 
A. Januszewicz ( *) · A. Prejbisz 
Department of Hypertension, Institute of Cardiology,  
Warsaw, Poland80
that blood pressure in the prehypertension range is carrying higher rates of incident 
hypertension and cardiovascular events than optimal BP < 120/<80 mmHg [1–6].
The prehypertensive category has been stratified into stage 1 prehypertension 
with blood pressure 120–129/80–84 mmHg and stage 2 prehypertension reflecting 
blood pressure 130–139/85 to 89 mmHg. Of note, most individuals with stage 2 
prehypertension have 1 or more concomitant conditions associated with increased 
cardiovascular risk and this term may better reflect the risk of progression to hyper -
tension and cardiovascular disease than stage 1 prehypertension. However the 
stage 1 prehypertension with BP in the range of 120 to 129/80 to 84 mmHg is also 
associated with increased risk but approximately half of that stage 2 prehyperten-
sion [6 , 7].
Stage 2 prehypertension progresses to hypertension at a rate of about 8–14% 
annually, which is twofold to threefold higher than blood pressure <120/80 mmHg. 
Adults with stage 2 prehypertension are also suffering from CVD approximately 
twice as likely as adults with optimal BP. From 2005 to 2006, approximately 3 of 8 
adults in the United States had BP in the stage 1 prehypertensive range of 120 to 
139/80 to 89 mmHg and roughly 1 in 8 adults had BP in the range of 130 to 139/85 
to 89 mmHg referred as stage 2 prehypertension [1, 6, 7].
Of note, the designation of prehypertension by JNC-7 had raised concerns since 
this category increased the number of individuals targeted for BP modification by 
millions in the United States. More importantly, the prehypertensive subgroup rep-
resents a heterogenous cohort of individuals with varying risk profiles for cardiovas-
cular disease.
7.2  Prevalence of Prehypertension
7.2.1  Prevalence of Prehypertension  
in Population-Based Studies
The prevalence of prehypertension and its associated risk factors has been investi-
gated worldwide indicating that prehypertension is a common condition across age, 
sex, ethnicity, and geographical boundaries in countries with both developed and 
developing economies. Of note the estimates of prehypertension prevalence are 
based on office or clinic blood pressure measurements and do not include out-of- 
office values [6].
Prevalence estimates in population-based samples range from 22 to 38% with 
only few studies reporting higher prevalence than 50% (Table  7.1). This indicates 
that data about the prevalence of prehypertension in populations worldwide are not 
consistent and depend on age, geographical region, and population studied [1–7].
Cross-sectional analysis of national representative data collected from 4805 
adults 18 years and older surveyed in the 1999–2000 National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey [NHANES] estimated the prevalence of prehypertension in the 
United States based on JNC-7 guidelines [8].
A. Januszewicz and A. Prejbisz81(continued)Table 7.1 Prevalence of raised blood pressure in representative population samples
Study Population Sample sizeAge (range or 
mean; years)Sex (% 
female) BMI (kg/m2)aPrevalence of 
prehypertension 
(%)Prevalence of 
hypertension (%)
Prehypertension
Wu et al. (2002) China 27,739 35–64 46.3 NA 35.3 NA
Yu et al. (2008) China, Thailand 10,748 35–74 53.0 23.7 21.0 Excluded
Gu et al. (2009) China 158,666 55.7 55.8 22.8 34.5 27.7
Erbel et al. (2011) Germany 4181 59.2 53.0 27.1 26.2 54.2
Janghorbani et al. (2008) Iran 69,772 44.1 49.7 26.3 (in whole sample) 52.1 23.4
Kokubo et al. (2008) Japan 5,494 56.0 53.2 22.7 35.2 27.6
Ishikawa et al. (2010) Japan 11,000 55.1 61.3 23.1 32.3 34.1
Tanaka et al. (2010) Japan 22,676 62.6 66.2 24.0 25.2 41.1
Fukuhara et al. (2012) Japan 2634 59.0 57.9 22.9 37.7 37.4
Choi et al. (2006) Korea 6074 45.9 56.9 23.8 31.6 22.9
Tsai et al. (2005) Taiwan 2225 49.9 53.3 23.7 34.0 34.7
Onat et al. (2008) Turkey 3034 48.0 50.5 27.7 32.8 50.3
Liszka et al. (2005) USA 8986 25–74 54.6 9.4% had BMI >30 33.0 47.0
Kshirsagar et al. (2006) USA 8960 54.0 53.5 27.7 37.3 Excluded
Hypertension
Yadav et al. (2008) Lucknow, North 
India1112 49.8 49.0 26.2 32.3 32.2
Ferguson et al. (2008) Jamaica 1972 36.3 66.5 26.1 30.0 27.5
Tsai et al. (2008) Taiwan 35,259 51.9 34.2 24.1 33.7 13.6
Vasan et al. (2001) USA 9845 52.0 57.3 26.7 54.3 Excluded
Asayama et al. (2004) Omahasa, rural 
Japanb1702 60.6 61.0 23.5 45.1 29.5
Zhang et al. (2006) Native Americans, 
USA2629 54.8 60.9 30.4 59.4 with DM, 
48.2 without DMExcluded7 Prehypertension, Statistics and Health Burden82
Study Population Sample sizeAge (range or 
mean; years)Sex (% 
female) BMI (kg/m2)aPrevalence of 
prehypertension 
(%)Prevalence of 
hypertension (%)
Hsia et al. (2007) Postmenopausal 
women in USA60,785 62.8 100 28.9 38.8 34.9
Glasser et al. (2011) USA 30,150 
(9799c)≥45.0 55.0 NA 62.9 in black 
individuals, 
54.1 in white 
individualsExcluded
Prehypertension defined as 120–139/80–89 mmHg
aIn individuals with prehypertension
bIncluded patients with comorbidities, including clinical cardiovascular disease
cNumber without hypertension after excluding adults with blood pressure ≥140 mmHg systolic and/or ≥90 mmHg diastolic and documented or reported use of 
antihypertensive medication
Abbreviations: DM diabetes mellitus, NA  not available
Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.: Nature Reviews, Egan B.M., Stevens-Fabry S.: Prehypertension—prevalence, health risks and 
management strategies. 12, 289–300, copyright 2015Table 7.1 (continued)
A. Januszewicz and A. Prejbisz83
As evaluated from 1999 to 2000 the prevalence of prehypertension in the United 
States was approximately 70 million in the age group >20 years and was more com-
mon in men [42 million] than in women [28 million], in younger and middle-age 
than older adults and in Hispanic than African-American individuals [8].
One of the important findings of the NHANES 1999–2000 survey was to show 
that abdominal obesity is associated with increased risk of prehypertension in 
American men and women. In this study, abdominal obesity was associated with 
increased risk of prehypertension in whites, blacks, and Hispanics being indepen-
dent of age, blood glucose, total cholesterol, exercise, and current smoking [9].
The survey indicated that proportions of risk of prehypertension explained by 
abdominal obesity were 15.2%, 22%, and 25.8% in white, black, and Hispanic men, 
respectively. The analogous values in women were 38.8%, 58.6%, and 32.5% 
clearly demonstrating that prehypertension could have been avoided if abdominal 
obesity was absent in both men and women of the three ethnic groups [9].
These data further indicated gender differences in the response of abdominal 
obesity for prehypertension. Approximately 7% of the differences in the risk of 
developing prehypertension between white and black men and between white and 
Hispanic men may be attributable to differences in rates of abdominal obesity. 
The analogous values for women were approximately 39.7% and 16.5%, respec-
tively [9 ].
In conclusion, despite having lower rates of abdominal obesity than their coun-
terparts, black men, Hispanic men, and Hispanic women had high population attrib-
utable risks. This may indicate that other factors than abdominal obesity may have 
explained power for racial differences in prehypertension in these groups.
Another report from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
[NHANES] conducted in 2005 to 2006 showed that approximately 37% of US 
adults had prehypertension. The number of adults with prehypertension was esti-
mated to be approximately 83 million based on extrapolations from NHANES 
2005–2006 [7].
Among this group, roughly 3 of 8 US adults, or approximately 31 million, have 
stage 2 prehypertension. The NHANES 2005–2006 report showed that prehyperten-
sion is associated not only with concomitant cardiovascular risk factors but also 
with several adverse health outcomes including new-onset diabetes and hyperten-
sion, cognitive impairment and increased number of CVD events [7].
Also data on the temporal changes in the prevalence of prehypertension and car -
diovascular risk factors were analyzed from 30,958 US adults >20 years of age who 
participated in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys between 
[NHANES] 1999 and 2012 [10].
The recent study showed that during this time period, the prevalence of prehyper -
tension has decreased modestly since 1999–2000. However the prevalence of sev-
eral risk factors for cardiovascular disease and incident hypertension increased 
among US adults with prehypertension, including prediabetes, diabetes mellitus, 
overweight, and obesity. There was also nonstatistically decrease in prevalence of 
adhering to the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension eating pattern [10].7 Prehypertension, Statistics and Health Burden84
Of note the prospective cohort analysis among 8960 middle-aged adults in the 
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities [ARIC] study showed that prehypertension 
levels of BP were clearly associated with the significant increase in incident cardio-
vascular disease. The effect of prehypertension was particularly pronounced among 
blacks, individuals with diabetes mellitus, elevated BMI and relatively low LDL 
cholesterol levels. These findings may provide compelling evidence for screening 
and early detection in vulnerable groups [2].
The population-based study included 4272 Mexican adult men and women aged 
20–65  years representing northern, middle, and southern parts of Mexico. The 
results of the study showed the prevalence of prehypertension in 37.5% of Mexican 
adults [11].
Several studies estimated the prevalence of prehypertension in China in different 
geographical regions and populations, including urban and urban cohorts.
The prevalence of prehypertension was estimated in a representative sample of 
25,196 adults aged 18–74 years in northeast of China. The Control hypertension and 
Other Risk Factors to Prevent Stroke with Nutrition Education in Urban Area of 
Northeast China [CHPSNE] Study was a cross-sectional study on hypertension and 
stroke risk factors among urban residents of northeast China years selected from 
2009 to 2010 [12].
Overall, 40.5% of urban Chinese adults had prehypertension with the prevalence 
of 47.7% and 33.6% in men and women, respectively, and is associated with many 
risk factors [12].
In another China National Hypertension Survey prospective cohort study includ-
ing 169,871 Chinese adults aged 40 years and older data on blood pressure were 
obtained at baseline examination in 1991 and from follow-up examination con-
ducted in 1999–2000. A multistage random cluster sampling design was used to 
select a representative sample of the general Chinese population from 17 provinces 
in the mainland China [13].
The results from China National Hypertension Survey Epidemiology Follow-up 
Study showed that the prevalence of prehypertension was 34.5% and was signifi-
cantly associated with an increased relative risk of cardiovascular disease [13].
Another population-based, cross-sectional survey of the Chinese Physiological 
Constant and Health Condition [CPCHC] was conducted between 2008 and 2010 
with the aim to estimate the prevalence of prehypertension coexisting with predia-
betes. Representative samples of the general population were selected from two 
urban and two rural areas provinces in mainland China [14].
The study showed that the prevalence of coexisting prehypertension and predia-
betes was 11%, was higher in men [14.2%] than in women [8.4%], increased with 
age and body mass index and was the lowest among Mongolian-Chinese [14].
Three cross-sectional surveys were conducted in Shandong province in the rural 
population of eastern China. The sample population included 8359, 18,922, and 
20,167 subjects included in 1991, 2002, and 2007, respectively [15].
The study documented that among the Chinese rural population, the prevalence 
of prehypertension increased significantly from 1991 to 2002 and remained high 
from 2002 until 2007. After adjustment for age and sex the prevalence of 
A. Januszewicz and A. Prejbisz85
prehypertension over the period of 16 years increased from 33.8% in 1991 to 54.6% 
in 2007. In each survey, the prevalence of prehypertension tended to decline with 
increasing age in both men and women [15].
In 2007, a cross-sectional population survey of CRF’s was carried out among 
19,003 adults aged 18–76 years in suburban Beijing indicating that the prevalence 
of prehypertension was 35.7% [38.2% in men and 31.8% in women]. Overall, 
85.3%, 49.8%, and 17.8% of men with prehypertension had one or more, two or 
more, and three or more CV risk factors, respectively [16].
The prevalence of prehypertension was also evaluated in the other Asian coun-
tries. The Jichi Medical School Cohort Study enrolled 11,000 community dwelling 
persons aged 18–90 years from general Japanese population and then followed for 
the average of 10.7 years. Participants aged 65 years and older constituted 22.8% of 
the sample [17].
In this study of a large sample of the Japanese general population the prevalence 
of prehypertension was 32.3% and was associated with an increased 10-year risk of 
cardiovascular disease [17].
The Korean National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey [KNHNES], a 
cross-sectional nationally representative survey conducted in 2001 collected mea-
sured blood pressure data and determined the prevalence of prehypertension in 
association with the risk factors in the Korean population [18].
Data from a comprehensive questionnaire together with a physical examination 
and blood sample were obtained and analyzed from 6074 Korean adults aged 
>20 years. The estimated age-adjusted prevalence of prehypertension was 31.6% 
[41.9% in men and 25.9% in women]. The KNHNES study indicated that male sex, 
aging, and obesity were predictors of prehypertension. Interestingly, a decreasing 
prevalence of prehypertension with age was found in this study [18].
The Nutrition and Health Survey in Taiwan [NAHSIT], a cross-sectional survey 
of 1039 men and 1186 women aged 18–96 years showed the overall prevalence of 
prehypertension of 34% in Taiwanese adults and was greater in men than in women. 
Multivariable logistic regression revealed that age and BMI were the determinants 
of prehypertensive status in men while age, waist circumference, and triglycerides 
were the determinants in women [19, 20].
Few studies showed a relatively high prevalence of prehypertension in geograph-
ically different populations. Between 1991 and 1999, a large population-based 
 sample of 36,424 Israel Defense Forces young healthy employees underwent peri-
odic medical evaluation in Israel. Prehypertension was observed in 48.9% of the 
subjects and was 50.6% among men and 35.9% among women. The prevalence of 
prehypertension remained constant across age groups among men but increased 
with age among women [21].
Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that male gender was the most 
powerful predictor of prehypertension and BMI was the strongest modifiable pre-
dictor of prehypertension among men and women.
Another study determined the prevalence of prehypertension in Africa in two eth-
nic groups of 782 individuals representing Sokoto State of northwestern Nigeria. The 
prevalence rate of prehypertension was 58.7% [men 59.2%, women 58.2%] [22].7 Prehypertension, Statistics and Health Burden86
The study showed that as compared to hypertension, prehypertension had earlier 
onset [second versus third decade] and peak [fourth versus fifth decade] of life. 
Obesity, abnormalities of glucose metabolism, and insulin resistance were the major 
factors associated with prehypertension.
A nationwide cross-sectional survey of 69,722 adults aged 25–65 years was con-
ducted in Iran from 2004 to 2005 with the objective to estimate the prevalence of 
prehypertension. It was also found that the estimated prevalence of prehypertension 
was 59.6% in men and 44.5% in women [23].
Prehypertension tended to increase with age and was more common in overweight 
and obese men and women and was also associated with the higher prevalence of 
additional cardiovascular risk factors which result in a high-risk profile [23].
Although the ethnicity most likely plays a role in the pathogenesis of prehyper -
tension, the current studies about the prevalence of prehypertension do not support 
the hypothesis that difference could be attributable to ethnicity per se.
These results do not indicate an ethnical pattern and for instance the prevalence 
of prehypertension in selected Chinese populations is similar to the prevalence 
found in the Mexican population. In addition, the prevalence of prehypertension in 
the United States [31%] is similar to the prevalence of Korea [31.6%] and Japan 
[32%]. The variability of prehypertension prevalence emphasizes that in addition 
to ethnicity, other risk factors play an important role in the development of prehy-
pertension [1 –6].
Of note, cross-sectional studies conducted to establish the associated risk factors 
for developing prehypertension demonstrated that aging, sex, low educational level, 
smoking, alcohol consumption, BMI, diabetes, elevated plasma glucose, triglycer -
ides, cholesterol levels, and low HDL-c levels were significantly associated with 
prehypertension [1–8].
7.2.2  Prevalence of Prehypertension in Selected Populations
Prehypertension prevalence in selected population studies is generally similar to the 
findings in population-based studies, after accounting for differences in age, sex, 
and inclusion or exclusion of patients with hypertension.
Studies that excluded subjects with hypertension reported a higher prevalence of 
prehypertension in comparison to those that included individuals with hypertension 
from the same countries. The prevalence of prehypertension was >30% in all studies 
including individuals with a mean BMI in the overweight range.
The prevalence of prehypertension in individuals with and without diabetes was 
estimated in the Strong Heart Study including 2629 participants free from hyperten-
sion and cardiovascular disease at baseline examination. They were followed for 
12 years to observe the prevalence of incident cardiovascular disease [24].
The results from the Strong Heart Study showed that the prevalence of prehyper -
tension was high in nondiabetic [48.2%] and even higher [59.4%] in diabetic non- 
hypertensive American Indians. Prehypertension was related to an increased 
A. Januszewicz and A. Prejbisz87
subsequent cardiovascular event rate in both diabetic and nondiabetic participants, 
but this increase was greater in individuals with diabetes [24].
The prevalence of prehypertension in white and nonwhite postmenopausal 
women was determined in the Women’s Health Initiative [WHI], a large cohort of 
60, 785 participants that included black, Hispanic, and Asian women. The preva-
lence of prehypertension was 39% among WHI study participants at baseline [25].
Prehypertension was identified in 39.9%, 32.1%, 42.6%, 38.7%, and 40.3% of 
white, black, Hispanic, American Indian, and Asian women, respectively. The dis-
tribution of blood pressure categories differed among ethnic groups.
It was found that age, body mass index, and prevalence of diabetes mellitus and 
hypercholesterolemia increased across the BP categories, whereas current smoking 
was more prevalent among normotensive women compared with those with prehy-
pertension and hypertension [25].
The differences in cardiovascular event rates between women with prehyper -
tension and hypertension in WHI study were seen and when compared with refer -
ent normotensive women, the hazard ratio for the composite cardiovascular 
outcome was 1.66 for women with prehypertension and 2.89 for those with hyper -
tension [25].
Another study Reasons for Geographic And Racial Differences in Stroke 
[REGARDS] recruited approximately equal representation of white and black par -
ticipants of total population of 30,239 aged 45 years and older [26].
The REGARDS study showed that the overall prevalence of prehypertension 
was 17%—however after excluding subjects with hypertension it was 51%.
It was observed that the prevalence of prehypertension was higher by age and 
black race and a higher prevalence of prehypertension was observed in obese indi-
viduals, self-reported heart disease and those with elevated hsCRP, diabetes and 
microalbuminuria compared to those without these factors. Heavy alcohol con-
sumption in white participants was associated with increased odds of prehyperten-
sion and was even greater in black participants [26].
7.2.3  Prevalence of Prehypertension Based on Meta-Analyses
The prevalence and risk factors for prehypertension were investigated in the meta- 
analysis which included 20 cross-sectional and 6 longitudinal studies with a total 
sample of 250,741 individuals of age range from 35 to 60 years. Most of the studies 
were conducted in East Asia [27].
The results indicated that pooled prevalence of prehypertension was 36% and 
was higher among males than that among females [40% vs. 33%]. After removing 
non-East Asian countries it has been found that pooled prevalence of prehyperten-
sion in 11 studies from China, Japan, and Korea was 35% and was similar to the 
overall pooled prevalence [27].
In another meta-analysis of incident cardiovascular disease in 18 prospective 
studies, estimates of prehypertension prevalence ranged from 25.2 to 46.0% [28].7 Prehypertension, Statistics and Health Burden88
Of the 18 studies 11 were from Asia [3 from China, 6 from Japan and 2 from 
Iran], 5 were from the United States and 1 each was from Turkey and Germany. The 
proportion of Asians was 79.6%. The sample size ranged from 1702 to 158, 666 and 
the follow-up duration ranged from 2.7 years to 31 years. All studies adjusted ade-
quately for potential confounders—at least five of six factors—including age, sex, 
diabetes mellitus, BMI cholesterol, and smoking [28].
The results of this meta-analysis showed that the estimates for prehypertension 
ranged from 32.6 to 41.1% for the five US studies, from 25.2 to 46.0% for the five 
Japanese studies, and from 30.0 to 35.3% for the three Chinese studies [28].
7.3  Risk of Incident Hypertension
Individuals with prehypertension are carrying a twofold to threefold higher risk of 
developing hypertension than those who are normotensive. Several factors related to 
study design may affect annual transition rates from prehypertension to hypertension 
including the duration of follow-up and whether the population includes the full range 
of prehypertension [120–139/80–89 mmHg] or only stage 2 prehypertension [1 –7].
Several studies indicate that absolute percentages of incident hypertension are 
generally higher with longer periods of observations when similar baseline blood 
pressure values are compared, but the annualized rates of incident hypertension are 
higher for the studies of shorter duration [1–7].
In contrast to annual incident hypertension rates of 8–20% reported in the studies 
lasting 2–4 years, annualized incident hypertension is 4–9% in studies with the 7–8 
follow-up. In one of the studies 57.3% of the original non-hypertensive cohort were 
hypertensive at 3.5 years, and 60.3% were hypertensive at 7 years [1–8].
Several studies have identified factors which may predict progression from pre-
hypertension to hypertension during the period of observation.
The Framingham Heart Study assessed frequency of progression from prehyper -
tension to hypertension in non-hypertensive participants and showed a stepwise 
increase in incidence of hypertension across the three non-hypertensive BP catego-
ries [29].
It has been demonstrated that 5.3% of participants with optimum BP categories, 
17.6% with normal and 37.3% with high-normal BP [stage 2 prehypertension] aged 
below 65 years progressed to hypertension over 4 years, respectively [29].
The study also documented for patients 65 years and older that corresponding 
4-year rates of progression from prehypertension to hypertension were 16%, 25.5%, 
and 49.5%, respectively. Obesity and weight gain also contributed to the progres-
sion and a 5% weight gain on the follow-up was associated with 20–30% increased 
odds of hypertension [29].
In conclusion, it has been demonstrated that older individuals and those with 
high-normal BP were more likely to progress to hypertension than younger people 
and those with normal or optimum BP. Incidence rates of hypertension were similar 
for men and women and multivariable analyses identified baseline body mass index 
A. Januszewicz and A. Prejbisz89
and weight gain as important determinants of future hypertension. In addition, sys-
tolic rather than diastolic BP was the major determinant of progression to 
hypertension.
In the Trials of Hypertension Prevention, 44% of the usual-care group that was 
prehypertensive at baseline developed hypertension during the 4-year follow-up. By 
contrast, the three intervention groups—implementing weight loss, sodium restric-
tion, and both interventions together—had a significantly reduced relative risk 
[0.78–0.82] of incident hypertension after 4 years [6, 7].
In the TROPHY study, 63% of the placebo treated patients aged 30–65 years 
with stage 2 prehypertension progressed to hypertension within 4 years, and >40% 
had progressed after only 2 years. In the PHARAO study, in adults with stage 2 
prehypertension, 43% of the group randomly allocated to placebo developed hyper -
tension in 3 years [6, 30].
Of note, the incidence rate in the PHARAO, TROPHY , and Framingham studies 
are of similar magnitude when the analysis is restricted to individuals with stage 2 
prehypertension at baseline.
The ATTICA study showed that increasing age, male sex, low education status, 
and C-reactive protein were positively associated with the development of hyperten-
sion. Also waist circumference was found to be independent predictor [6, 7].
A prospective cohort study of 18,865 non-hypertensive persons [30.4% black, 
69.6% white] aged from 18 till 85 years examined electronic health record data 
from 197 community-based outpatient clinics in the Southeast of the United States. 
Of note the covariable adjusted median conversion time when 50% became hyper -
tensive was 365 days earlier for blacks than whites [31].
Among covariables, baseline systolic BP 130–139 mmHg and 120–129 mmHg, 
as well as age >75 and in the range 55–74 years were the strongest predictors for 
hypertension. Additional predictors included age range 35–54 years, diastolic BP in 
the range 80–89 mmHg, obesity, and diabetes mellitus. The study showed that con-
version from prehypertension to hypertension is accelerated in blacks suggesting 
that effective interventions in prehypertension could reduce racial disparities in 
prevalent hypertension [31].
Low levels of physical fitness have also been independently associated with the 
risk of incident hypertension in men with prehypertension as documented in the 
study conducted at Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Washington DC, USA. The 
findings support an increase in the rate of progression to hypertension with decreased 
exercise capacity [32].
The most pronounced and very similar increase in risk occurred in the two lowest-  
fit categories, suggesting an S-shaped association. The health benefits are evident at 
moderate levels of fitness attainable by a brisk walk of 20–40 min most days of the 
week by most middle-age and older individuals. Fitness attenuated the risk for devel-
oping hypertension, regardless of age, BMI, and other traditional risk factors [32].
In another Chinese study it has been demonstrated that older age at baseline, 
Mongolian race, alcohol-drinking, obesity, high salt intake, low level of physical 
activity, and family history of hypertension were found to be associated with inci-
dent hypertension [14].7 Prehypertension, Statistics and Health Burden90
7.4  Health Burden
7.4.1  Prehypertension and Cardiovascular Risk
The results of available meta-analyses confirm previous studies and reports indicat-
ing that individuals with prehypertension free from cardiovascular disease are car -
rying increased relative risk of coronary heart disease, stroke, and total cardiovascular 
disease [33].
Although it is recognized that persons with prehypertension are at higher risk of 
cardiovascular diseases, the risk may be related to the increased risk of developing 
hypertension per se. It also remains unresolved whether the mild elevation of BP 
directly increases the risk of cardiovascular diseases or whether augmented preva-
lence of other concurrent risk factors may be responsible [33, 34].
Based on the available studies prehypertension increases the risk of myocardial 
infarction by 3.5 times and coronary artery disease by 1.7 times. When analyzed 
separately by sex, the risk of myocardial infarction and coronary artery disease was 
augmented 4.2 and 3.4 times, respectively [6].
Of note, the risk is lower in non-hypertensive individuals as compared to those 
with hypertension. Among subjects with prehypertension, the risk of coronary 
artery disease was 2.9 times greater in persons aged 45–64 years and 4.4 times in 
persons 65 years or older when compared with persons younger than 45 years. It 
was also higher in subjects with diabetes mellitus [2.1 times] and individuals with 
hypercholesterolemia [2.5 times] [7].
Among subjects with prehypertension who have at baseline clinical cardiovascu-
lar disease, diabetes or both, annualized incidence of cardiovascular disease in the 
group randomly allocated to placebo averaged approximately 4.3% with an esti-
mated 10-year rate of 43%.
Subject with prehypertension, particularly those in a stage 2 prehypertension, 
were characterized by multiple cardiovascular risk factors contributing to the aug-
mented risk ratios. In most studies, risk was adjusted for common comorbid factors, 
such as age, sex, tobacco smoking, and total cholesterol or other lipid fractions, 
when assessing the risk of prehypertension [6, 7].
7.4.2  Population-Based Studies and Selected Populations
In general, available studies indicate that subjects with prehypertension were char -
acterized by annualized absolute excess risk of cardiovascular disease of approx. 
0.39–0.61%, with an average of 0.5% [33].
Of note the studies included in these reports were based on the office BP mea-
surements and also indicate that stage 2 prehypertension was associated with greater 
risk than stage 1 prehypertension [6, 7].
Given the spectrum of risk factors associated with stage 2 prehypertension, this 
group has a higher incidence of CVD. Several cohort studies documented a signifi-
cant contribution of stage 2 prehypertension to CVD risk and the adjusted hazard 
ratios in these studies ranged from approximately 1.4 to 2.3 [6, 7].
A. Januszewicz and A. Prejbisz91
Given an estimated number of 31 million people with stage 2 prehypertension in 
the United States and the absolute excess CVD risk ranging from 0.39 to 0.61% 
annually, this population contributes to between 121,000 and 189,000 excess in 
cardiovascular events annually [6, 7].
On the other hand, the annual incidence of cardiovascular disease among middle- 
age individuals with stage 2 prehypertension is 1%, with stage 1 prehypertension is 
0.8%, and with optimal BP is 0.5%. With an estimated 40 million individuals with 
stage 1 prehypertension in the United States and an absolute cardiovascular disease 
risk of 0.8% and an excess of 0.3%, this group would account for approximately 
340,000 total and 140,000 excess cardiovascular events annually [6, 7].
Several cohort studies on prehypertension and cardiovascular disease have pro-
vided the information on the risk of incident cardiovascular disease in this group 
(Table 7.2) [6].
Fareed et al. estimated that the population-attributable risk of prehypertension in 
the United States is 47% for myocardial infarction and 20% for coronary artery 
disease. This implied that there is a potential for reducing the incidence of myocar -
dial infarction by 47% if prehypertension is treated. Russell et al. found that if pre-
hypertension is eliminated, then hospital admissions would be reduced by 3.4%, 
nursing home admissions by 6.5%, and mortality by 9.1% [33].
Vasan et al. previously reported that the 10-year cumulative incidence of CVD 
associated with the high-normal BP [130–139/85–89 mmHg] in the Framingham 
Heart Study was higher among older participants [>65 years] than younger partici-
pants [<65 years]. However the older participants had an elevated incidence of CVD 
even among those with optimal BP [29].
Liszka et al. reported that in the longitudinal, population-based US cohort, pre-
hypertension was associated with increased risk of major cardiovascular events 
independently of other cardiovascular risk factors [35].
The authors concluded that low-range prehypertension was associated with 
increased cardiovascular disease in unadjusted analyses but was not statistically sig-
nificant in adjusted analyses. High-normal blood pressure remained a predictor of 
cardiovascular disease in unadjusted and adjusted analyses. It is relevant to consider 
that the majority of prehypertensive participants had at least one cardiovascular risk 
factor [35].
The risk for incident cardiovascular disease was also evaluated among 8960 
middle- aged adults in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities [ARIC] study. The 
outcome was incident cardiovascular disease defined as fatal/nonfatal coronary heart 
disease, cardiac procedure, silent myocardial infarction, or ischemic stroke [2 ].
The study showed that prehypertension levels of BP were clearly associated with 
significant increase in incident cardiovascular disease. The effect of prehyperten-
sion was particularly pronounced among blacks, individuals with diabetes mellitus, 
elevated BMI, and relatively low LDL cholesterol levels [2].
In the high-normal blood pressure group, the hazard ratio for incident cardiovas-
cular disease compared with optimal blood pressure was 2.49 after adjustment for 
baseline demographic factors and remained significant after adjustment for tradi-
tional risk factors. Both the normal BP and the high-normal BP groups were 7 Prehypertension, Statistics and Health Burden92Table 7.2 Cardiovascular risk with prehypertensiona
StudySample 
sizeNumber with 
prehypertensionFollow-up 
(years)HR (95% CI) for 
cardiovascular diseaseAbsolute difference 
per year (%) NNT (40%)bNNT (100%)b
Morbidity and mortality
ARIC (2006) 8960 1279 11.6 2.33 (1.85–2.92) ~0.42 60 24
Framingham (2001) 6859 1794 12.0 Men: 1.6 (1.1–2.2) ~0.54 (0.43c) 48 19
Women: 2.5 (1.6–4.1) ~0.52 (0.25c) 50 20
NHANES 1 (2005) 8986 2708d18.0 1.42 (1.09–1.84) ~0.53 48 19
NHEFS 1 (2000) 12,269 1947 7–21 NA NA 32 13
REGARDS (2013) 27,748 13,407 4.5 1.38 (0.94–2.02) ~0.12e208 83
Strong Heart Study 
(2006)2629 1390d12.6 1.80 (1.28–2.54) ~0.61 42 17
Women’s Health 
Initiative (2007)60,785 23,596d7.7 1.77 (1.52–2.06) ~0.39 65 26
Mortality only
MRFIT (1994) 347,978 77,248 15.0 CAD: 1.66 (1.56–1.77) 
CV A: 2.14(95% CI NA)~0.09 278 111
Taiwan (2008) 35,259 4655 13.0 1.96 (1.5–2.6) ~0.10 250 100
aCompared with normal blood pressure levels in individuals without baseline cardiovascular disease
bNNT for 10 years to prevent one cardiovascular disease event based on estimated reductions of either 40% or 100% in the absolute excess risk between indi-
viduals with prehypertension and those with optimal blood pressure
cAge-adjusted
dIncludes all individuals with prehypertension (120–139/80–89  mmHg), whereas other studies included only those with stage 2 hypertension 
(130–139/85–89 mmHg)
eStroke was the only cardiovascular outcome reported; for adults aged 45–59 years
Abbreviations: CAD coronary artery disease, CVA  cerebrovascular accident (stroke), NA  not available, NNT number needed to treat
Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.: Nature Reviews, Egan B.M., Stevens-Fabry S.: Prehypertension—prevalence, health risks and 
management strategies. 12, 289–300, copyright 2015
A. Januszewicz and A. Prejbisz93
associated with incident coronary heart disease. The majority of cardiovascular 
events were related to coronary heart disease rather than stroke [2].
The risk for incident cardiovascular disease events was determined in white and 
nonwhite postmenopausal women determined in the Women’s Health Initiative 
[WHI], a large cohort of 60,785 participants that includes significant numbers of 
black, Hispanic, and Asian women [25].
Compared with referent normotensive women adjusted hazard ratios for women 
with prehypertension were 1.58 for cardiovascular death, 1.76 for myocardial 
infarction, and 1.93 for stroke. Hazards ratios for the composite outcome with pre-
hypertension did not differ between ethnic groups, although the numbers of events 
among Hispanic and Asian women were small [25].
For every 1000 women with prehypertension, 7 had a first cardiovascular event 
each year compared to 14 events per year for women with hypertension and 4 events 
per year for normotensive women. Thus, the population-attributable risk for prehy-
pertension was 3 excess cardiovascular events per year per 1000 women, whereas 
8 excess events per year could be attributed for hypertension [25].
The hazard ratios of incident cardiovascular disease associated with prehyper -
tension in individuals with and without diabetes was assessed in the Strong Heart 
Study in which a total of 2629 participants free from hypertension and cardiovas-
cular disease at baseline examination were followed for 12 years to observe the 
incident cardiovascular disease. Approximately 42% of the participant had dia-
betes [24].
The Strong Heart Study findings revealed that in nondiabetic participants, prehy-
pertension increased cardiovascular events 1.8-fold compared with their normoten-
sive counterparts with an absolute increase of 6 cardiovascular events per 1000 
persons [24].
Diabetes alone increased the risk of cardiovascular disease by 2.9-fold compared 
with normotensive nondiabetic participants. Diabetes plus prehypertension 
increased the cardiovascular disease risk 3.7 times (Fig.  7.1), representing an abso-
lute increase of 19 cardiovascular events per 1000 person-years [24].
When the prehypertensive category was stratified into those with BP 120–
129/80–84 mmHg or BP 130–139/85 to 89 mmHg, hazards ratios for those in the 
higher group were greater, but there was a significant risk even in those in the lower 
group [24].
The coexistence of impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fasting glucose and 
prehypertension also increased cardiovascular disease risk significantly when com-
pared with normotensive participants with normal glucose tolerance. The magni-
tude of the increased cardiovascular disease risk related to the coexistence of 
prehypertension, glucose intolerance, and diabetes suggest that pharmacological 
intervention for blood pressure control in these groups may be warranted to prevent 
cardiovascular disease morbidity and mortality [34].
Qureshi et al. evaluated the association of prehypertension with the incidence 
atherothrombotic brain infarction and all strokes during follow-up of cohort of 5181 
persons who participated in the Framingham Study. It has been demonstrated after 
adjusting for age, gender, obesity, diabetes mellitus, cigarette smoking 7 Prehypertension, Statistics and Health Burden94
hypercholesterolemia and study period that prehypertension is not associated with 
ischemic or all strokes [34].
An analysis of the nationally representative cohort available in the National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey [NHANES] in 1976–1980 merged with 
the NHANES II Mortality Study [NHANES2MS] showed that prehypertension was 
not independently associated with increased all-cause or CVD mortality. Further 
analysis of subgroups of age >55 years yielded the same lack of association [36].
The Jichi Medical School Cohort Study that included large sample of the 
Japanese population showed that the risk of CVD for those with prehypertension 
was 45% greater than those with normal BP [17].
Across the total duration of follow-up the increased CVD hazard risk associated 
with prehypertension tended to be higher in those under the age of 65 years than 
those over 65 years. In the separate analysis of the CVD during the first 5 years and 
second 5 years of the follow-up period, prehypertension was associated with the 
modest, non-significant increase in the overall hazard risk of CVD during the sec-
ond 5-year period, but a widening gap between the nonelderly [<65  years] and 
elderly [>65 years] participants [17].
7.5  Results from Meta-Analyses
In the meta-analysis of incident cardiovascular disease in 18 prospective studies, 
estimates of prehypertension prevalence ranged from 25.2 to 46.0%, although sev-
eral reports were not representative [28].
Of the 18 studies 11 were from Asia [3 from China, 6 from Japan, and 2 from 
Iran], 5 were from the United States, and 1 each was from Turkey and Germany. The 
40
30
20
10
0Cumulativ e incidence (%)
02 46
Follow-up time (y ear)81 01 2Norm alPrehy pertension onlyDiabetes onlyPrehy pertension+diabetes
14
Fig. 7.1 Cumulative cardiovascular disease incidence during 12 years of follow-up by prehyper -
tension and diabetes status in the Strong Heart Study cohort. Reprinted with permission of Wolters 
Kluwer: Zhang Y ., Lee E.T., Devereux R.B. et al.: Prehypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular 
disease risk in a population-based sample. The Strong Heart Study. Hypertension, 2006, 47, 410–
414. http://hyper.ahajournals.org/
A. Januszewicz and A. Prejbisz95
proportion of Asians was 79.6%. The sample size ranged from 1702 to 158, 666 and 
the follow-up duration ranged from 2.7 years to 31 years [28].
This meta-analysis found, after controlling for multiple cardiovascular risk fac-
tors, significant association between prehypertension and CVD incidence. The 
results were consistent across age, gender, trial characteristics, ethnicity, and fol-
low- up duration.
More importantly, even low-range prehypertension increased the risk of CVD 
compared with optimal BP and the risk was higher with high-range prehyperten-
sion. The relative risk was significantly higher in the high-range prehypertensive 
populations than in the low-range populations. It was evaluated that 15.9% of CVD, 
14.6% of CHD, and 19.6% of stroke cases could be prevented if prehypertension 
was eliminated [37].
Also Guo et al. showed in the meta-analysis of prospective studies that the pre-
hypertensive patients have a greater risk of incident stroke, MI, and CVD events in 
the high prehypertension range.
The meta-analysis of Huang et al. evaluated data from 1,129,098 participants 
derived from 20 prospective cohort studies. The results showed that after controlling 
for multiple cardiovascular risk factors, prehypertension is significantly associated 
with CVD mortality (Fig.  7.2), mostly driven by high-range prehypertension. The 
risk for stroke mortality was higher than for CHD mortality and it was calculated 
that 10.5% of CVD, 4.8% of CHD, and 14.6% of stroke death could be prevented if 
prehypertension was eliminated [38].
It is interesting that in this analysis prehypertension was not associated with all- 
cause mortality even at high-range prehypertension levels. In the subgroups where 
participants with CVD at baseline were excluded and the data were adjusted for Study or Subg roup
Mainous 2004 0.077 0.17264 .9% 2004
2005
2005
2006
2007
2007
2008
2008
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2011
2012
20121.08 [0.77, 1.51]
1.02 [0.73, 1.43]
1.15 [0.97, 1.36]
3.06 [1.12, 8.36]
1.48 [1.42, 1.54]
1.58 [1.12, 2.23]
1.23 [0.85, 1.78]
1.22 [0.97, 1.53]
1.50 [0.80, 2.81]
1.06 [0.94, 1.20]
1.39 [1.27, 1.52]
1.27 [0.83, 1.94]
1.55 [0.86, 2.79]
1.10 [0.72, 1.68]
1.28 [0.98, 1.67]
1.11 [0.44, 2.80]
1.66 [0.58, 4.75]
1.40 [0.98, 2.00]5.0%
9.8%
0.8%
14.4%
4.8%
4.3%
7.7%
1.8%
11.8%
12.9%
3.5%
2.1%
3.5%
6.5%
0.9%
0.7%
4.5%0.4574
0.207
0.1989
0.4055
0.0583
0.3293
0.239
0.4383
0.0953
0.2469
0.1044
0.5068
0.33650.3006
0.2162
0.1363
0.4721
0.5365
0.1820.3921.11840.1398
0.1756
0.1885
0.117
0.3207
0.0613
0.0461
0.2170.02110.51280.08680.0198 0.1707 Bowman, 2005
Sairenchi 2005
Baldinger 2006
Terry 2007
Hsia 2007
Gu 2008
Thomas 2008
Lee 2009
Pednekar 2009
He 2009
Dorjgochoo 2009
Lorenzo  2009
Hoza wa 2009
Ikeda 2009
Kim 2011
Stojanov  2012
100.0% 1.28 [1.16, 1.40]Takashima 2012
0.1 0.2 0.5 1
Favours preh ypertension Favours optimal BP25 10Total (95% Cl)
Heterogeneity:  Tauz = 0.01; Chiz = 45.34, df = 17 (P = .0002);  Iz= 63%log[Risk Ratio] SE Year Weight IV ,Risk Ratio
 Random, 95% ClRisk Ratio
IV, Random, 95% Cl
Test for ov erall eff ect: Z = 5.22 (P < .0001)
Fig. 7.2 Forest plot of CVD mortality comparison: prehypertension vs. optimal BP. Reprinted 
from American Heart Journal; 167; Huang Y ., Su L., Cai X. et al.; Association of all-cause and 
cardiovascular mortality with prehypertension: A meta-analysis; 160–168; Copyright (2014), with 
permission from Elsevier7 Prehypertension, Statistics and Health Burden96
adequate risk factors, prehypertension was associated with a very slight increase in 
all-cause mortality. The reason for the discrepancy in the association of prehyper -
tension with cardiovascular and all-cause mortality are unclear. Of note, also Guo 
et al. showed in their meta-analysis that prehypertension was not associated with 
all-cause mortality [38, 39].
Lee et al.’s meta-analysis of 12 studies which included total of 518,520 partici-
pants showed that prehypertension was associated with the risk of stroke. However 
among individuals with lower-range prehypertension, stroke risk was not signifi-
cantly increased. In subjects with higher values within the prehypertensive range, 
stroke risk was substantially increased indicating that stroke risk is largely driven by 
the higher values within the prehypertensive range and is particularly relevant in 
non-elderly individuals [40].
Taken together, the population burden of cardiovascular disease associated with 
prehypertension is substantial, whereas the absolute excess risk of prehypertension 
for an individual without previous clinical cardiovascular disease is relatively small.
Taking into consideration the high prevalence of prehypertension, roughly 30% 
of cardiovascular events in the global population are estimated to occur in those 
with prehypertension. Of note cardiovascular events are likely to be attributable to 
elevated blood pressure alone irrespective of other common risk factors.
Consequently, prevention strategies need to be carefully considered to design 
and implement strategies both to reduce population-attributable risk among the 
majority of subjects who are at low-to-moderate risk, and to decrease adverse out-
comes among individuals with prehypertension who are at high risk.
References
 1. Chobanian A V . Prehypertension revisited. Hypertension. 2006;48:812–4.
 2. Kshirsgar A V , Carpenter M, Bang H, et al. Blood pressure usually considered normal is associ-
ated with an elevated risk of cardiovascular disease. Am J Med. 2006;119:133–41.
 3. Assadi F.  Prehypertension : a warning sign of future cardiovascular risk. Int J Prev Med. 
2014;special issue:S4–9.
 4. Whaley-Connell A, Sowers JR.  Is it time to target prehypertension. Cardiovasc Ther. 
2010;28:337–8.
 5. Habib GB, Virani SS, Jneid H.  Is 2015 the primetime year for prehypertension ? 
Prehypertension: a cardiovascular risk factor or simply a risk marker? J Am Heart Assoc. 
2015;4:e001792. https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA/115.00.1792.
 6. Egan BM, Stevens-Fabry S. Prehypertension—prevalence, health risks and management strat-
egies. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015;12:289–300.
 7. Egan BM, Lackland DT, Jones DW. Prehypertension: an opportunity for a new public health 
paradigm. Cardiol Clin. 2010;28:561–9.
 8. Wang Y , Wang QJ.  The prevalence of prehypertension and hypertension among US adults accord-
ing to the New Joint National Committee Guidelines. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164:2126–34.
 9. Okosun IS, Boltri JM, Anochie LK, et al. Racial / ethnic differences in prehypertension in 
American adults: population and relative attributable risks of abdominal obesity. J Hum 
Hypertens. 2004;18:849–55.
 10. Booth JN, Li J, Zhang L, et al. Trends in prehypertension and hypertension risk factors in USA 
adults: 1999–2012. Hypertension. 2017;70:275–84.
A. Januszewicz and A. Prejbisz97
 11. Rodriguez-Ramirez M, Simental-Mendia L, Gonzalez-Ortiz M, et  al. Prevalence of pre-
hypertension in Mexico and its association with hypomagnesemia. Am J Hypertens. 
2015;28:1024–30.
 12. Meng XJ, Dong GH, Wang D, et al. Epidemiology of prehypertension and associated risk fac-
tors in urban adults from 33 communities in China. Circ J. 2012;76:900–6.
 13. Gu D, Chen J, Wu X, Duan X, et al. Prehypertension and risk of cardiovascular disease in 
Chinese adults. J Hypertens. 2009;27:721–9.
 14. Wu J, Yan W, Qiu L, et al. High prevalence of coexisting prehypertension and prediabetes among 
healthy adults in northern and northeastern China. BMC Public Health. 2011;11:794–802.
 15. Yang J, Lu F, Zhang C, et al. Prevalence of prehypertension and hypertension in a Chinese 
rural area from 1991 to 2007. Hypertens Res. 2010;33:331–7.
 16. Zhang W-H, Zhang L, An W-F, et al. Prehypertension and clustering of cardiovascular risk 
factors among adults in suburban Beijing, China. J Epidemiol. 2011;21:440–6.
 17. Ishikawa Y , Ishikawa J, Ishikawa S, et al. Prehypertension and the risk for cardiovascular dis-
ease in the Japanese general population : the Jichi Medical School Cohort Study. J Hypertens. 
2010;28:1630–7.
 18. Choi KM, Park HS, Han JH, et al. Prevalence o prehypertension and hypertension in a Korean 
population : Korean National Health and Nutrition Survey 2001. J Hypertens. 2006;24:1515–21.
 19. Tsai P-S, Ke T-L, Huang C-J, et al. Prevalence and determinants of prehypertension status in 
the Taiwanese general population. J Hypertens. 2005;23:1355–60.
 20. Liu L-K, Peng L-N, Chen L-K, et al. Prehypertension among middle-age and elderly people in 
Taiwan : a five-year follow-up. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2010;17:189–94.
 21. Grotto I, Grossman E, Huerta M, et al. Prevalence of prehypertension and associated cardio-
vascular risk profiles among young Israeli adults. Hypertension. 2006;48:254–9.
 22. Isezuo SA, Sabir AA, Ohwovorilole AE, et  al. Prevalence, associated factors and relation-
ship between prehypertension and hypertension : a study of two ethnic African populations in 
Northern Nigeria. J Hum Hypertens. 2011;25:224–30.
 23. Janhorbani M, Amini M, Gouya MM, et al. Nationwide survey of prevalence and risk factors 
of prehypertension and hypertension in Iranian adults. J Hypertens. 2008;26:419–26.
 24. Zhang Y , Lee ET, Devereux RB, et al. Prehypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular disease 
risk in a population-based sample. The Strong Heart Study. Hypertension. 2006;47:410–4.
 25. Hsia J, Margolis KL, Eaton CB, et al. Prehypertension and cardiovascular disease risk in the 
Women’s Health Initiative. Circulation. 2007;115:855–60.
 26. Glasser SP, Judd S, Basile J, et al. Prehypertension, racial prevalence and its association with 
risk factors: analysis of the reasons for geographic and racial differences in stroke [REGARDS] 
study. Am J Hypertens. 2011;24:194–9.
 27. Guo X, Zou L, Zhang X, et al. Prehypertension. A meta-analysis of the epidemiology, risk fac-
tors, and predictors of progression. Tex Heart Inst J. 2011;38:643–52.
 28. Huang Y , Wang S, Cai X, et al. Prehypertension and incidence of cardiovascular disease: a 
meta-analysis. BMC Med. 2013;11:177–86.
 29. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, et al. Assessment of frequency of progression to hyperten-
sion in non-hypertensive participants in the Framingham Heart Study: a cohort study. Lancet. 
2001;358:1682–6.
 30. Luders S, Schrader J, Berger J, et al. The PHARAO study: prevention of hypertension with 
the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor ramipril in patients with high- normal blood 
pressure—a prospective, randomized, controlled prevention trial of the German Hypertension 
League. J Hypertens. 2008;26:1487–96.
 31. Selassie A, Wagner CS, Laken ML, et al. Progression is accelerated from pre-hypertension to 
hypertension in African Americans. Hypertension. 2011;58:579–87.
 32. Faselis C, Doumas M, Kokkinos JP, et al. Exercise capacity and progression from prehyperten-
sion to hypertension. Hypertension. 2012;60:333–8.
 33. Suri MFK, Qureshi AI.  Prehypertension as a risk factor for cardiovascular diseases. J 
Cardiovasc Nurs. 2006;21:478–82.7 Prehypertension, Statistics and Health Burden98
 34. Qureshi AI, Suri MFK, Kirmani JF, et al. Is prehypertension a risk factor for cardiovascular 
disease? Stroke. 2005;36:1859–63.
 35. Liszka HA, Mainous AG, King DE, et al. Prehypertension and cardiovascular morbidity. Ann 
Fam Med. 2005;3:294–9.
 36. Mainous AG, Everett CJ, Liszka H, et al. Prehypertension and mortality in a nationally repre-
sentative cohort. Am J Cardiol. 2004;94:1496–500.
 37. Guo X, Zhang X, Guo L, et al. Association between pre-hypertension and cardiovascular out-
comes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. Curr Hypertens Res. 
2013;15:703–16.
 38. Huang Y , Su L, Cai X, et al. Association of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality with prehy-
pertension: a meta-analysis. Am Heart J. 2014;167:160–8.
 39. Guo X, Zhang X, Zheng L, et al. Prehypertension is not associated with all-cause mortality: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. PLoS One. 2013;8:e61796.
 40. Lee M, Saver JL, Chang B, et al. Presence of baseline prehypertension and risk of incident 
stroke. Neurology. 2011;77:1330–7.
A. Januszewicz and A. PrejbiszPart II
Organ Damage in Prehypertension101 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_8
S. Laurent ( *) 
Paris-Descartes University, Assistance-Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France 
Department of Pharmacology and Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou,  
INSERM U970, Paris-Descartes University, Assistance Publique—Hôpitaux de Paris,  
Paris, France
e-mail: stephane.laurent@egp.aphp.fr 
P. G. Cunha 
Center for the Research and Treatment of Arterial Hypertension and Cardiovascular Risk, 
Serviço de Medicina Interna do Hospital da Senhora da Oliveira,  
University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
Life and Health Science Research Institute (ICVS), School of Medicine,  
University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal8Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases 
of Prehypertension
Stéphane Laurent and Pedro Guimarães Cunha
Children, adolescent, and adults with prehypertension have a high risk for develop-
ing hypertension. Modifiable cardiovascular risk factors, such as prediabetes and 
diabetes mellitus, overweight and obesity, high lipid diet, high salt intake, and lack 
of regular physical activity play a crucial role in the transition between prehyperten-
sion and hypertension. Because these cardiovascular risk factors are key determi-
nants of increased arterial stiffness, and because increased arterial stiffness is a 
determinant of incident hypertension, the question arises as to whether arterial stiff-
ness plays a crucial role in the transition between early phases of prehypertension 
and hypertension. In this review, we will analyze the epidemiological and hemody-
namic evidences that increased arterial stiffness is a determinant of incident hyper -
tension. We will also address the complexity of this relationship by discussing the 
hemodynamic and biomechanical pathways involved in the bidirectional influence 
between arterial stiffness and blood pressure. And then, we will discuss (a) the pre-
dictive value of arterial stiffness not only for incident hypertension, but also for 
cardiovascular events, (b) the influence of low-grade inflammation associated with 
chronic diseases in the development of arterial stiffness and subsequently 102
hypertension, (c) how the concept of Early Vascular Ageing can help understanding 
the relationship between arterial stiffness and prehypertension, and (d) the relation-
ships between metabolic syndrome, arterial stiffness, and prehypertension in 
children.
8.1  Introduction
Children, adolescent, and adults with prehypertension have a high risk for develop-
ing hypertension [1–3] and cardiovascular disease [4–6]. Modifiable cardiovascular 
(CV) risk factors, such as prediabetes and diabetes mellitus, overweight and obesity, 
high lipid diet, high salt intake, and lack of regular physical activity play a crucial 
role in the transition between prehypertension and hypertension [1, 7]. Because 
these CV risk factors are key determinants of increased arterial stiffness, and 
because increased arterial stiffness is a determinant of incident hypertension, the 
question arises as to whether arterial stiffness plays a crucial role in the transition 
between early phases of prehypertension and hypertension.
In this review, we will analyze the epidemiological and hemodynamic evidences 
that increased arterial stiffness is a determinant of incident hypertension. We will 
also address the complexity of this relationship by discussing the hemodynamic and 
biomechanical pathways involved in the bidirectional influence between arterial 
stiffness and blood pressure. And then, we will discuss (a) the predictive value of 
arterial stiffness not only for incident hypertension, but also for cardiovascular 
events, (b) the influence of low-grade inflammation associated with chronic dis-
eases in the development of arterial stiffness and subsequently hypertension, (c) 
how the concept of Early Vascular Ageing can help understanding the relationship 
between arterial stiffness and prehypertension, and (d) the relationships between 
metabolic syndrome, arterial stiffness, and prehypertension in children.
8.2  Arterial Stiffness as a Cause of Incident Hypertension: 
Epidemiological Evidences
From hemodynamic principles, arterial stiffness is believed to underlie, at least in 
part, the age-associated changes in SBP. Recent cross-sectional studies have shown 
a strong association between prehypertension and arterial stiffness. In the Reference 
Values for Arterial Stiffness’ Collaboration study (Reference values 2010), the ref-
erence and normal values of arterial stiffness, measured with cfPWV , have been 
determined in large international cohorts. In this cohort, age and blood pressure 
were the major determinants of arterial stiffness. Interestingly, cfPWV was higher 
in subjects with normal (stage 1 prehypertension) and high-normal (stage 2 prehy-
pertension) BP than in age-matched subjects with optimal BP. Thus, prehyperten-
sion is associated with arterial stiffening at a given age decade. However, 
cross-sectional studies are not sufficient and longitudinal studies are needed to dem-
onstrate the temporal relationship between arterial stiffness and BP.
S. Laurent and P. G. Cunha103
Liao and colleagues [8] prospectively examined the relation between arterial 
stiffness and the development of hypertension over 6 years of follow-up in a cohort 
of 6992 normotensive men and women aged 45–64 years at baseline from the bira-
cial, population-based Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study. Arterial 
stiffness was measured at the carotid level, from high-resolution B-mode ultrasound 
examination of the left common carotid artery, using adjusted stroke change in arte-
rial diameter (in micrometers, simultaneously adjusted for diastolic BP, pulse pres-
sure, pulse pressure squared, diastolic arterial diameter, and height). The incident 
rates of hypertension from the lowest to the highest quartiles of arterial stiffness 
were 6.7%, 8.0%, 7.3%, and 9.6%, respectively (P < 0.01). One standard deviation 
increase in arterial stiffness was associated with 15% greater risk of hypertension, 
independent of established risk factors for hypertension and the level of baseline BP.
Dernellis and coauthors [9] assessed, in a 4 years longitudinal study, the predic-
tive value of aortic stiffness on future hypertension in non-hypertensive subjects 
with BP < 140/90. Aortic stiffness was determined by echocardiography at a level 
of 3 cm above the aortic valve, at baseline in 2512 subjects. A stepwise increase in 
hypertension incidence occurred across the male and older participants: 3.8% of 
young female individuals, 11.5% of young male, 26.1% of old female, and 58.8% 
of old male subjects progressed to hypertension over 4 years. In multivariate analy-
sis, aortic stiffness remained significantly associated with the progression to future 
hypertension after adjustment to classic risk factors in men and women and in young 
and old populations.
Najjar and colleagues [10] measured carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity 
(cfPWV) at baseline in 449 normotensive or untreated hypertensive volunteers (age 
53 ± 17 years). Repeated measurements of BP were performed during an average 
follow-up of 4.9  years. After adjusting for covariates including age, body mass 
index, and mean BP, linear mixed effects regression models showed that cfPWV 
was a significant and independent determinant of the longitudinal increase in SBP 
(P = 0.003 for the interaction term with time). In a subset of 306 subjects who were 
normotensive at baseline, hypertension developed in 105 (34%) during a median 
follow-up of 4.3 years (range 2–12 years). By stepwise Cox proportional hazards 
models, cfPWV was an independent predictor of incident hypertension (hazard 
ratio 1.10 per 1  m/s increase in cfPWV , 95% confidence interval 1.00–1.30, 
P = 0.03) in individuals with a follow-up duration greater than the median.
More recently, Kaess and coauthors [11] analyzed the longitudinal community- 
based Framingham cohort and studied the temporal relationships among BP and 3 
measures of arterial stiffness measured through carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity 
(cfPWV) over a 7-year period. In a multivariable-adjusted regression model, cfPWV 
at baseline (beta, 1.5 [95% CI, 0.5–2.6] mm Hg per 1 SD; P = 0.006) was associated 
with systolic BP during examination 7 years later. In a model that included systolic 
and diastolic BP and additional risk factors during examination at baseline, cfPWV 
was associated with incident hypertension (OR, 1.3 [95% CI, 1.0–1.6] per 1 SD; 
P  =  0.04) 7  years later in 1048 participants without hypertension at baseline. 
Conversely, BP at baseline was not associated with cfPWV 7  years later. Thus, 
although higher aortic stiffness was associated with higher risk of incident 8 Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases of Prehypertension104
hypertension, the reverse was not observed, i.e., initial BP was not independently 
associated with risk of progressive aortic stiffening.
In conclusion, longitudinal studies measuring either carotid stiffness (one study) 
or aortic stiffness (three studies) at baseline and incident hypertension suggest that 
arterial stiffness measurement could help identify normotensive individuals at risk 
of incident hypertension. These subjects should be targeted for the implementation 
of interventions aimed at preventing or delaying the progression of subclinical arte-
rial stiffening, thus preventing or delaying the onset of hypertension. In the follow-
ing paragraph, we will see how a progressive arterial stiffness can lead to the onset 
of hypertension.
8.3  Arterial Stiffness as a Cause of Incident Hypertension: 
Hemodynamic Evidences
The wording “arterial stiffness” is a general term that refers to the loss of arterial 
compliance and/or changes in arterial wall elastic properties [12]. Compliance of 
large arteries, including the thoracic aorta that has the major role, represents their 
ability to dampen the pulsatility of ventricular ejection and to transform a pulsatile 
pressure (and flow) at the site of the ascending aorta into a continuous pressure (and 
flow) downstream at the site of arterioles, in order to lower the energy expenditure 
during organ perfusion and protect small arteries of target organs (mainly the brain 
and the kidney) from the damaging effects of pressure pulsatility [13]. When arter -
ies stiffen with aging, they lose their ability to dampen the pulsatility of ventricular 
ejection and small arteries of target organ are damaged.
Another important consequence of arterial stiffening is the increase in systolic 
BP at the central level. Indeed, the arterial pressure waveform is a composite of the 
forward pressure wave created by ventricular contraction and a reflected wave. 
Waves are reflected from the periphery, mainly at branch points or sites of imped-
ance mismatch (i.e., from an elastic to a stiff arterial segment). In elastic vessels, 
because PWV is low, reflected wave tends to arrive back at the aortic root during 
diastole. In the case of stiff arteries, because PWV is high, the reflected wave arrives 
back at the central arteries earlier, adding to the forward wave, and augmenting 
pressure pulsatility (i.e., SBP minus DBP, or pulse pressure—PP) and SBP at the 
central level (i.e., at the level of the thoracic aorta and carotid arteries).
Importantly, an increase in central SBP and PP can occur without any detectable 
changes in peripheral SBP and PP, most often measured at the site of the brachial 
artery. Indeed, as described above, in peripheral arteries, reflection sites are closer 
than in central arteries, and reflected waves travel faster on peripheral arteries than 
on central arteries, which are less stiff in young subjects. This has been described as 
the “amplification phenomenon,” which states that the amplitude of the pressure 
wave is higher in peripheral arteries than in central arteries. Thus, brachial SBP and 
PP overestimates central SBP and PP in young subjects [13, 14].
A cross-sectional relationship between prehypertension and central pulse pres-
sure and/or amplification has been demonstrated recently. In the Reference Values 
S. Laurent and P. G. Cunha105
for Arterial Measurements Collaboration study [14], the reference and normal val-
ues of central systolic and pulse pressures, as well as pressure amplification (periph-
eral SBP minus central SBP), have been determined in large international cohorts 
[14]. In this cohort, age, sex, and blood pressure were the major determinants of 
central systolic and pulse pressures. Interestingly, central SBP and PP and pressure 
amplification were higher in subjects with normal (stage 1 prehypertension) and 
high-normal (stage 2 prehypertension) BP than in those with optimal BP [14]. Thus, 
prehypertension is associated with increased central SBP, PP, and pressure amplifi-
cation at a given age decade, and, as described above, the later parameters are the 
consequence of an increase in arterial stiffness.
Complementary evidence to the increased risk of prehypertension associated 
with increased central blood pressure values can be extracted from the Anglo 
Cardiff Collaborative Trial II (ACCT) [15], evaluating central and peripheral 
blood pressure from 10,613 subjects, to show that: (a) subjects with normal and 
high-normal peripheral blood pressure had higher central systolic blood pressure 
than subjects with optimal peripheral BP and (b) 70% of subjects with prehyper -
tension stage 1 and 2 had central systolic pressures values that overlapped with 
the ones measured for subjects with grade I hypertension. Recently, the mechani-
cal properties of the proximal aorta were studied by cardiovascular resonance 
imaging in 2001 participants of the Dallas Heart Study [16]. After adjustment on 
age, mean BP, and a number of clinical characteristics of this multiracial and mul-
tiethnic cohort, individuals with prehypertension had lower proximal aorta disten-
sibility and compliance than those with optimal BP, although aortic arch PWV 
was not significantly different. This evidence is supported by previous findings 
from Redheuil and coworkers [17], showing that reduced aortic strain and disten-
sibility are early manifestations of stiffness and aging in large vessels. Thus, as 
discussed in the previous two paragraphs, aortic stiffness is increased in individu-
als with prehypertension, partly in response to a higher BP and partly indepen-
dently of mean BP.
Increased arterial stiffening in prehypertension can increase pressure pulsatility 
and thus damage the heart, kidney, and brain through increased afterload on the 
heart and increased pulsatility at the site of small brain and kidney arteries. Because 
target organ damage is a major cause of cardiovascular and renal complications, it 
is expected that arterial stiffness has a predictive value for cardiovascular events, 
namely in prehypertensive individuals. Urbina and colleagues [18] and Drukteinis 
and coworkers in the Strong Heart Study [19] both evaluated populations of very 
young subjects (children and young adults) showing, after multivariate analysis, 
that prehypertension was independently associated to target organ damage, namely 
arterial stiffness (measured by different methods), increased left ventricular mass, 
and diastolic dysfunction. Manios and coworkers [20] demonstrated the same in a 
population of 896 adult subjects. Subjects enrolled in the Third National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (without type 2 Diabetes and normotensive) were 
examined according to their blood pressure level. Data show that subjects with pre-
hypertension had higher prevalence of microalbuminuria than those with optimal 
blood pressure [21].8 Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases of Prehypertension106
8.4  Hemodynamic and Biomechanical Approach 
of the Arterial Stiffness–BP Relationship
The bidirectional relationship between arterial stiffness and BP is rendered more 
complex by two characteristics of hemodynamics and biomechanics (Table 8.1).
First, an insidious positive feedback loop between local mechanobiological 
responses and global hemodynamics, as suggested by Humphrey and coauthors [25], 
may explain why central artery stiffening is at the same time a cause of hypertension 
and one of its consequences. We have seen above that arterial stiffening in early phases 
of prehypertension may be a major determinant of elevated systolic BP on the long 
term. Indeed, the longitudinal assessment of the temporal relationship between carotid 
[8] and aortic stiffness [10, 11] on the one side and incident hypertension on the other 
side suggests a precursor role of arterial stiffening in future altered systolic hemody-
namic load. However, the reverse occurs when hypertension is installed, even at the 
lower grade of prehypertension. Indeed, arterial stiffening can be a consequence of the 
rise in mean BP. Early work, in the 1950s–1970s, suggested that sustained increases 
in BP stimulate matrix synthesis and thus vascular thickness and structural stiffness 
[26, 27]. In addition, high BP loads the stiff components of the arterial wall and 
changes the spatial organization between smooth muscle cells and extracellular matrix 
[28], and eventually increases arterial stiffness.
Table 8.1 The bidirectional relationship of arterial stiffness and prehypertension
Author/year Study type Participants Result
Arterial stiffness promotes hypertension
1.Liao et al. [8] 
(ARIC Study)Longitudinal
(6 years 
follow-up)6992
Normotensives1 SD increase in arterial stiffness 
increased 15% risk of developing 
HTN
2.Dernellis et al. [9] Longitudinal
(4 years 
follow-up)2571
NormotensivesIncreased arterial stiffness was 
associated with an OR of 1.2 for 
the development of HTN
3.Najjar et al. [10]
(BLSA)Longitudinal
(4.3 years 
follow-up)306
NormotensivesOR of developing HTN increase 
1.1 for every 1 m/s increase in 
PWV
4.Peralta et al. [22]
(mesa)Longitudinal
(4.3 years 
follow-up)2512
NormotensivesHigher CIMT and lower aortic 
distensibility are independent 
predictors of the development of 
HTN
5.Kaess et al. [11]
(Framingham)Longitudinal
(7 year 
follow-up)1408
NormotensivesOR of developing HTN increased 
1.3 per each SD increase in PWV
Prehypertension promotes increase in arterial stiffness
6.Tomyiama et al. [23] Longitudinal
(6 years 
follow-up)1503
NormotensivesSubjects with persistent preHTN 
had higher annual increase in 
arterial stiffness
7.AlGhatrif et al. [24] 
(BLSA)Longitudinal
(9 years 
follow-up)775 subjects 
from general 
populationPrehypertensives had higher 
increase in PWV than 
normotensives
CIMT carotid intima-media thickness, HTN hypertension, preHTN prehypertension, PWV pulse 
wave velocity, SD standard deviation
S. Laurent and P. G. Cunha107
A good illustration that prehypertension can promote increased arterial stiffness 
is given by the following two studies. Using brachial-ankle PWV (baPWV) 
Tomiyama and coworkers [23], evaluated longitudinally 1563 healthy subjects, 
dividing them by 3 age classes (29–39, 40–59 and >60 years) and evaluating them 
according to their blood pressure class at the beginning of the study and 6 years 
later; subjects who persistently maintained BP values of prehypertension were the 
ones presenting with the most accelerated rate of increase in arterial stiffness (over 
those who persisted normotensives or who had borderline phenotypes—presenting 
values of either normo or prehypertension in different evaluations), after adjustment 
for several other concurrent risk factors. The Baltimore Longitudinal Study of 
Aging has also contributed to this hypothesis, by showing that in 775 subjects free 
of cardiovascular disease and followed longitudinally for 9.3  years with several 
measurements of PWV , it was possible to see that PWV increases with age, but this 
increase was steeper not only when subjects were hypertensives but also (with a 
smaller effect) whenever their systolic blood pressure was between 120 and 
139 mmHg [24].
Second, arterial stiffening may be paralleled by a remodeling of small resistance 
arteries. Small and large artery alterations are indeed closely interdependent in sus-
tained grade I hypertension, and likely during the early phases of prehypertension. 
A temporal relationship is difficult to establish, and we previously suggested that a 
cross talk, by which small artery alterations influence larger artery phenotype, and 
conversely large artery alterations influence small artery phenotype, is more likely 
than a linear sequence [29]. Both small and large artery damages contribute to the 
rise in central BP, by favoring the generation of wave reflections and their propaga-
tion, respectively. This is exemplified by the fact that, in hypertensive patients, 
media-to-lumen ratio of subcutaneous small resistance arteries and cfPWV are both 
independent determinants of central SBP [30].
The cross talk between the micro- and the macro-circulation [29] promotes a 
vicious circle which can be described by starting at the site of small arteries. An 
increased resistance in small arteries increases mean blood pressure (BP), and 
then increases arterial stiffness in the large elastic arteries, which in parallel 
with more pressure wave reflections increases central systolic BP, variability of 
24 h ambulatory brachial BP, and ultimately damages target organs [29, 31, 32]. 
The increased central BP pulsatility in turn is a factor of small resistance artery 
damage, i.e., increased media-to-lumen ratio of subcutaneous small resistance 
arteries. This has initially been reported in hypertensive animals [33] and then 
in hypertensive patients with brachial PP [34] and more recently with central 
systolic and PPs measured with applanation tonometry [30]. Interestingly, the 
wall-to-lumen ratio of retinal arteries is significantly correlated with 24 h sys-
tolic BP [35], and retinal microcirculation changes can already be found in pre-
hypertensive subjects [36, 37]. Eventually, increased media-to-lumen ratio of 
subcutaneous small resistance arteries, which is associated with reduced lumen 
diameter, represents the largest part of the structural part of increased total 
peripheral resistance, leading to a rise in mean BP, and thus continuing the 
vicious circle.8 Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases of Prehypertension108
8.5  Arterial Stiffness, Prehypertension, and Inflammation
The purpose of this section is not to detail the entire amount of evidence correlating 
inflammation as a precursor of both increased blood pressure and subclinical arte-
riosclerosis. It is rather set to pinpoint some key pathophysiologic mechanisms and, 
most importantly, to report on findings of BP and arterial stiffness in subjects with 
inflammation-associated pathologies. It is also a call for attention to all clinicians 
dealing with chronic disease and low-grade inflammation conditions: these are sub-
jects that can have their baseline clinical condition very well controlled with mod-
ern available therapies—they will have considerably low morbidity arising from 
these conditions; on the other hand, they will survive longer and be subjected longer 
to the inflammatory stimulus and therefore be at higher risk for cardiovascular con-
ditions such as high BP and subclinical arteriosclerosis, eventually progressing to 
established CVD. It is therefore of paramount importance to survey these subjects 
more strictly for the development of higher CV risk phenotypes (such as prehyper -
tension and accelerated vascular aging).
A recent review of the molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in the biology 
of vascular aging has emphasized several aberrations that conduce to an acceleration 
of the aging process and increase in BP: aberrant signal transduction, oxidative 
stress, and activation of proinflammatory and pro-fibrotic transcription factors [38]. 
Several studies have been dedicated to establish a causal role of these biological 
mechanisms in the development of increased BP and arterial stiffness or to associate 
inflammatory states with the development of subclinical arteriosclerosis.
Using a randomized sham procedure in 100 healthy individuals, Vlachlopoulos 
and colleagues [39] compared subjects injected with a vaccine for Salmonella typhi 
with those receiving placebo, to find that inflammatory markers increased (hs CRP, 
IL6 and MMP9) in the first group, as did pulse wave velocity.
McEniery and colleagues [15] studied the influence of known polymorphisms of 
the metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9) gene (a protein with an enzymatic function 
degrading elastin and other arterial wall proteins) on arterial stiffness, in 865 healthy 
subjects from a community cohort; MMP-9 is usually released in response to proin-
flammatory states by neutrophils and monocytes or mechanic stress [15, 40]; the 
authors described that PWV was in fact increased in subjects carrying such poly-
morphisms (in the promotor and coding gene of MMP-9) as well as higher levels of 
MMP-9 in serum.
The Amsterdam Growth and Health Longitudinal Study (AGHLS) investigated 
if endothelial dysfunction and/or low-grade inflammation could influence the devel-
opment of arterial stiffness [41], in 293 healthy young adults during a period of 
6 years. It showed that higher levels of serum markers of both endothelial dysfunc-
tion (soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1 [sICAM-1], soluble vascular cell 
adhesion molecule 1, soluble endothelial selectin, and soluble thrombomodulin) 
and low-grade inflammation (C-reactive protein [CRP], serum amyloid A, interleu-
kin 6, interleukin 8, tumor necrosis factor-α, and sICAM-1) were associated with 
the development of higher measurements of arterial stiffness at the carotid and fem-
oral levels.
S. Laurent and P. G. Cunha109
Fifty-three prehypertensive subjects were followed during 3 years by Kim and 
coworkers [42], and compared to matched normotensives concerning the expression 
of inflammatory markers and the progression of arterial stiffness measures; the authors 
report that prehypertensives had higher expression of lysophosphatidylcholines 
(lysoPCs—with a known effect on vasodilation impairment) and higher circulating 
Lp-PLA2 activity, oxidized LDL (ox-LDL), interleukin 6 (IL-6), urinary 8-epi-
PGF2a, and higher brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity (ba-PWV). They postulated 
that a proinflammatory state could, through enhanced oxidative stress, lead to higher 
arteriosclerosis in prehypertensives. The same research team followed 254 prehyper -
tensives for 3.5 years, dividing them in three groups, according to the evolution of BP 
levels they registered (those who remained prehypertensive, those who became nor -
motensive and those who progressed to hypertension) [43], studying changes in oxi-
dative stress, lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 activity, and arterial stiffness. 
Their results in the group of persistent prehypertensives suggest that increased oxida-
tive stress could enhance arterial stiffness without increase in blood pressure. 
Tomiyama and coworkers [44] also looked into the chronic influence of inflammation 
in the development of hypertension and arterial stiffness; evaluating 3274 middle-
aged normotensive men during 9  years, they measured annually arterial stiffness, 
hsCRP, and blood pressure, and showed that higher levels of circulating hsCRP were 
associated with higher changes in arterial stiffness measurements, which in turn were 
associated with increases in BP.  Similar observations (concerning the influence of 
low-grade inflammation in the development of arterial stiffness) were also found in 
the Malmo Diet and Cancer Study [45], following 2338 subjects for 17 years.
This accumulating evidence can be supplemented with findings of increased 
arterial stiffness and cardiovascular disease in subjects suffering from chronic 
inflammatory diseases.
Ambrosino and colleagues [46] performed meta-analysis and meta-regression 
studies to evaluate the impact of Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) in several arterial stiff-
ness measures (25 articles, 1472 RA patients); they showed that subjects with this 
condition had higher arterial stiffness, the magnitude of which was influenced by 
the severity of the inflammatory condition; more importantly, this influence can be 
seen from the earlier stages of the disease.
Zanolli and coworkers [47] took into consideration the cardiovascular risk para-
dox evident in patients with inflammatory bowel disease: the feature of malabsorp-
tion conditions a reduction in prevalence of obesity, dyslipidemia, and hypertension, 
but still patients suffer high cardiovascular mortality. They performed a meta- 
analysis to determine if these subjects have associated increased arteriosclerosis (9 
studies included, 342 patients with ulcerative colitis, and 234 patients with Crohn’s 
disease). They reported that these patients have higher arterial stiffness than matched 
controls, and a meta-regression performed with data from studies including patients 
treated with anti-TNFα drugs suggested that this later subgroup of patients could 
have lower arterial stiffness [47].
On this later topic (anti-TNFα treatment and reduction of arteriosclerosis) Tam 
and colleagues have conducted a systematic review of published information [48], 
concluding that the existing evidence is leaning to a beneficial effect of these drugs 8 Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases of Prehypertension110
in stopping progression of arteriosclerosis (in these high inflammatory autoimmune 
pathologies) and even in reversing some of the arterial damage documented before 
the initiation of the drug.
Much controversy has been surrounding patients with HIV and their association 
to increased cardiovascular risk, particularly concerning the progression of arterio-
sclerosis. In spite of conflicting results (mainly derived from heterogeneous study 
populations, with different treatment strategies, some of which influence themselves 
the cardiovascular risk of the patient) recent work by Maia Leite and coworkers [49] 
suggests that HIV-infected patients have higher progression rates of arteriosclerosis 
and that among main contributors to this effect is the record of a CD4+ T-cell nadir 
below 200 cells/μL, an expression of previous severe immunosuppression.
A recent meta-analysis and meta-regression of 18 studies including subjects with 
Obstructive Sleep Apnoea Syndrome (OSAS) has studied the impact of this nosol-
ogy in the expression of higher levels of inflammatory markers and arterial stiffness 
[50]; the findings support the increased levels of both inflammatory markers and 
arterial stiffness measurements in these subjects.
A final word within this section is due to the recent review executed by Liu and 
coworkers [51], correlating inflammation, autoimmunity, and hypertension. Short 
of suggesting that hypertension could be an autoimmune disease, the authors did an 
extensive revision of the role of inflammatory cytokines (some of which induced by 
Ang II), and especially dwell on the role of tissue transglutaminase in mechanisms 
promoting hypertension and arterial stiffness through the renin-angiotensin system 
and cross-linking of extracellular matrix proteins promoting vascular remodeling.
8.6  Measurement of Arterial Stiffness
Details on the measurement of arterial stiffness are given here, in order to better 
understand the pathophysiological meaning of large artery stiffening, and its con-
sequences on central BP.  Arterial stiffness can be evaluated at the systemic, 
regional, and local levels [12, 31]. In contrast to systemic arterial stiffness, which 
can only be estimated from models of the circulation, regional and local arterial 
stiffness can be measured directly, and noninvasively, at various sites along the 
arterial tree. A major advantage of the regional and local evaluations of arterial 
stiffness is that they are based on direct measurements of parameters strongly 
linked to wall stiffness. Reviews have been published on the methodological 
aspects [12, 31, 52].
The measurement of pulse wave velocity (PWV) is generally accepted as the 
most simple, noninvasive, robust, and reproducible method with which to determine 
arterial stiffness. The measurement of PWV between the common carotid artery and 
the common femoral artery (carotid-femoral PWV) is a direct measurement, and it 
corresponds to the widely accepted propagative model of the arterial system [13, 
31]. Measured along the aortic and aorto-iliac pathway, it is the most clinically rel-
evant, since the aorta and its first branches are what the left ventricle “sees,” and are 
thus responsible for most of the pathophysiological effects of arterial stiffness. 
Carotid-femoral PWV has been used in most epidemiological studies 
S. Laurent and P. G. Cunha111
demonstrating the predictive value of aortic stiffness for CV events, namely in 
hypertensive patients [53–55]. By contrast, PWV measured outside the aortic track, 
at the upper (brachial PWV) or lower limb (femoro-tibial PWV), had no predictive 
value in patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) [56].
PWV is usually measured using the foot-to-foot velocity method from various 
waveforms. These are usually obtained, transcutaneously at the right common 
carotid artery and the right femoral artery (i.e., “carotid-femoral” PWV—cfPWV), 
and the time delay (Δt, or transit time) measured between the feet of the two wave-
forms [12, 57]. The “foot” of the wave is defined at the end of diastole, when the 
steep rise of the wavefront begins. The transit time is the time of travel of the “foot” 
of the wave over a known distance. A variety of different waveforms can be used 
including pressure [57, 58], distension, and Doppler [59]. The distance (D) covered 
by the waves is usually assimilated to the surface distance between the two record-
ing sites, i.e., the common carotid artery (CCA) and the common femoral artery 
(CFA). The direct distance ΔD is (CFA to CCA). PWV is calculated as PWV =  D 
(meters)/Δt (seconds). Magnetic resonance imaging allows determining aortic stiff-
ness according to the same methodology [17].
Other methods have been used in pathophysiological and epidemiological stud-
ies in prehypertensive subjects. They include, at the regional level, either two-sites 
methods such as the aortic arch PWV with magnetic resonance imaging [16], 
brachial- ankle PWV , the heart-ankle PWV , and the finger-toe PWV , or one-site 
methods such as the QKD, the Arteriograph, and the Mobilograph methods [52]. At 
the local level, they include high-resolution echotracking methods and magnetic 
resonance imaging and use the noninvasive determination of arterial distensibility 
as distensibility = AS/cPP, where AS is arterial strain, defined as relative changes in 
area (Amax-Amin/Amin) during the systole, and where cPP is the central pulse 
pressure obtained by tonometry [12, 52].
8.7  Predictive Value of Arterial Stiffness 
for Cardiovascular Events
Discussing arterial stiffness in the early phases of prehypertension is important, not 
only because arterial stiffness has predictive value for incident hypertension, but 
also because arterial stiffness is an independent risk factor for CV events. The larg-
est amount of evidence has been given for aortic stiffness measured through 
cfPWV .  This has been initially reported in the late 1990s-early 2000s [53, 54]. 
Currently, a meta-analysis [55] of 19 studies showed the predictive value of aortic 
stiffness for fatal and nonfatal CV events in various populations having different 
levels of CV risk: general population, hypertensive patients, elderly subjects, type 2 
diabetic patients, and patients with end-stage renal disease. In summary, aortic stiff-
ness has demonstrated an independent predictive value for various outcomes (total 
mortality, CV mortality, coronary events, asymptomatic CAD, stroke, functional 
outcome after stroke, onset of dialysis) in various population (general population, 
elderly, hypertensives, diabetics (T2D), CAD, after acute stroke, stroke/TIA, mod-
erate and severe chronic kidney disease—CKD and ESRD, and renal transplant 8 Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases of Prehypertension112
recipients) [31]. Importantly, the predictive value of arterial stiffness for CV events 
is independent of classical CV risk factors, including risk scores such as the 
Framingham Risk Score (FRS) and the European risk score (SCORE). Thus, arte-
rial stiffness is able to predict CV events beyond the traditional risk factors. A meta- 
analysis of 18 longitudinal cohort studies [60] has been performed with another 
method of determination of arterial stiffness, the measure of the brachial-ankle 
PWV (baPWV), which significantly predicted the risk of total CV events and all- 
cause mortality.
Ben Shlomo et al. [61] undertook a systematic review and obtained individual 
participant data from 16 studies in 17,635 participants, in order to determine the 
study-specific associations of cfPWV with CV outcomes. Using Cox proportional 
hazard models and random and after adjusting for conventional risk factors, they 
showed that cfPWV remained a significant predictor of CV events, namely coronary 
heart disease events. Moreover, a significant interaction with age was observed, i.e., 
the younger the subjects the higher the predictive value for CV events.
These data are consistent with previous findings that we obtained 20 years ago, 
after a biomechanical analysis of the carotid artery wall in normotensives and 
hypertensives [62]. In order to evaluate the elastic properties of the wall material of 
the common carotid artery, we determined Young’s incremental elastic modulus 
(Einc) as a function of BP and circumferential wall stress, in 102 patients with 
never-treated essential hypertension and 40 age- and gender-matched normotensive 
subjects, using high-resolution echotracking and applanation tonometry. A major 
finding was that the “intrinsic” stiffness of the arterial wall material, determined 
through Einc calculated at a common circumferential wall stress, was increased in 
younger HT patients, but not in middle-aged and older HT patients. Thus, in these 
later categories, carotid stiffness was mainly due to the increase in BP, loading the 
stiff components of the arterial wall, whereas in younger subjects arterial stiffness 
was partly due to some abnormalities in the components of the arterial wall material 
and partly due to the high BP. The present findings are consistent with the interac-
tion with age observed in the individual meta-analysis by Ben Shlomo et al. [61]. 
Taken together, they suggest that changes in the complex structure of the arterial 
wall may occur during the early phases of prehypertension, leading to increased 
arterial stiffness and ultimately high central and then peripheral systolic BP, whereas 
adaptive mechanisms occur later, aiming at rendering arterial stiffness only depen-
dent on BP level.
8.8  Early Vascular Aging and Prehypertension
The aging of the large artery wall is characterized by a reduction in the elastin con-
tent, as well as an increased content of collagen, associated with changes in cell–
matrix interactions, which altogether increase arterial stiffness [28, 63, 64]. In 
recent years a better understanding of these processes has led to the concept of Early 
Vascular Ageing (EV A) [65–68] in subjects with higher arterial stiffness than 
expected for their age and gender. More generally, EV A indicates a pronounced 
effect of aging on the vascular tree and especially on arterial function. Structurally, 
S. Laurent and P. G. Cunha113
EV A can be seen as an inadequate ability for repairing arterial damage in response 
to various mechanical, metabolic, and chemical stresses [65]. The arteries in sub-
jects with such accelerated aging, present biological and cardiovascular risk fea-
tures that would be expected years later, if the aging process would not have been 
accelerated through the interaction of age with different risk factors (traditional and 
non-traditional). Here, we use the concept of Early Vascular Ageing (EV A) to better 
understand the relationship between arterial stiffness and prehypertension.
Vascular aging in general, and EV A more specifically, can be investigated nonin-
vasively through the measurement of a number of parameters, but arterial stiffness 
has been the most often studied, likely because of the robustness of its measure-
ment. Arterial stiffness, which can be considered as an “imaging” biomarker, may 
be more predictive than “circulating” biomarkers, like hs-CRP [69], and show a 
better additional prediction when coupled to classical CV risk scores [70, 71]. 
Particularly, arterial stiffness can be considered as a measure of the cumulative 
influence of CV risk factors with aging on the arterial tree. Indeed, arterial stiffness 
reflects the true arterial wall damage, whereas blood pressure, glycemia, and lipids, 
which are fluctuating along the follow-up of patients, may not. A temporal dissocia-
tion exists between the observed values of classical (i.e., age, blood pressure, total 
cholesterol) and up-to-date (i.e., hs-CRP, BNP, plasma renin) CV risk factors which 
can be considered as “snapshots” [29], and arterial stiffness which integrates the 
long-lasting effects of all identified and non-identified CV risk factors and thus may 
be considered as relevant “imaging” biomarker [72].
EV A may help understanding the relationship between arterial stiffness and hemo-
dynamic changes in the early phase of prehypertension, leading after years of arterial 
remodeling and target organ damage to incident hypertension. Interestingly, the 
Lancet commission on hypertension lead by M. Olsen [ 73] adopted the EV A concept 
through a life-course preventive and therapeutic strategy aiming at reducing CV risk 
factors, target organ damage, and CV events at various periods of life (childhood, 
young adult, middle-age, advanced age, and elderly). Indeed, a number of modifiable 
CV risk factors are associated with both EV A, i.e., higher arterial stiffness than 
expected for age, and prehypertension. These modifiable CV risk factors include clas-
sical CV risk factors, such as high BP, hyperglycemia, overweight, impaired glucose 
tolerance, metabolic syndrome, type 1 and 2 diabetes, chronic kidney disease, high 
plasma lipid levels, smoking, fat diet, high salt intake, and lack of regular physical 
activity; they include additional CV risk factors, such as chronic low-grade inflamma-
tion, oxidative stress, social deprivation, perceived stress, abnormal sleep pattern, 
thrombogenic factors, prenatal fetal growth, and hormonal status [1 , 2, 12].
Cunha et al. [66] applied the EV A concept in a population from northern Portugal, 
an area which registers an especially high prevalence of hypertension and stroke 
incidence by contrast with other southern European people. In this cohort study 
which enrolled 3038 individuals, individuals were classified with EV A if their 
cfPWV was at least 97.5th percentile of z-score for mean PWV values adjusted for 
age, using normal European reference values as comparators (Reference values 
2010). The overall prevalence of EV A was higher than expected in this so-called 
low cardiovascular risk area: 12.5%. Moreover, 26.1% of individuals below 30 years 
presented with EV A and 40.2% of individuals in that same age strata were placed 8 Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases of Prehypertension114
above the 90th percentile of cfPWV . Thus, high prevalence rates of EV A and note-
worthy large artery damage were found in young individuals, a significant percent-
age of whom had prehypertension. Although not all key factors of EV A in this 
population have been determined, one must bear in mind the high prevalence of 
overweight/obesity and adiposity measures, high salt intake, lack of physical activ-
ity, and the epidemiological transitions of the population in the last 40  years 
(Fig. 8.1; [65, 66]).
In fact when developing a logistic regression model for EV A in these subjects, 
one could see (Table  8.2, adapted from [66]) the expected influence of blood pres-
sure; but it is of particular interest to remark that subjects with High-Normal blood 
pressure had an OR of 1.7 of developing accelerated vascular aging, when com-
pared with subjects with optimal blood pressure.
0
InactivityObesity
Abdominal ObesityDyslipidemia HypertensionSmoking Diabetes20406080 60.1
21.343.575.1
31.6
18.8
9.1Percenta ge
Cardiova scular Risk Factors
Fig. 8.1 Prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors in the Guimarães/Vizela Study [66]
Table 8.2 Prehypertensives have an increased risk of presenting EV A—Logistic Regression 
model for Early Vascular Aging (adapted from [66])
B-Coefficient (SE) Odds ratio (95% CI) p value
Age < 30 years 1.173 (0.225) 3.232 (2.078–5.026) <0.001
Age 30–39 years 0.114 (0.228) 1.121 (0.717–1.752) 0.618
Normal BP 0.227 (0.193) 1.255 (0.859–1.834) 0.240
High-normal BP 0.562 (0.220) 1.754 (1.1.40–2.698) 0.011
Grade 1 HT 1.134 (0.260) 3.107 (1.865–5.174) 0.010
Grade 2/3 HT 2.235 (0.630) 9.350 (2.719–32.149) <0.001
HR > 75 bpm 0.510 (0.187) 1.665 (1.154–2.403) 0.006
Diabetes 1.042 (0.444) 2.832 (1.188–6.789) 0.019
Male sex 0.363(0.165) 1.438 (1.041–1.986) 0.028
EVA early vascular aging, HR heart rate, BP blood pressure, HT hypertension, bpm beats per min-
ute, SE standard error, CI confidence interval using age 40–49 years, Optimal BP, and female sex 
as reference class
S. Laurent and P. G. Cunha115
8.9  Metabolic Syndrome, Arterial Stiffness, 
and Prehypertension in Children
The relationship between arterial stiffness, metabolic syndrome, and BP levels have 
been discussed in several research articles [74–76] and reviews [66, 68, 77]. Data in 
adults have been discussed most of the time. We focus here on children and adoles-
cents, since this is at these young ages that most often the early phases of prehyper -
tension occur, and that preventive measures are the most effective [2, 78, 79].
On another perspective, the concept of early vascular aging and the relationship 
between prehypertension and arterial stiffness are altogether very cohesive with the 
existing evidence that links the prevalence and progression of cardiovascular risk 
factors at young ages with premature manifestations of arteriosclerosis and, there-
fore, earlier excessive cardiovascular risk. The particularly enthusiastic feature of 
this cohesive link is the notion that, at these stages/ages, cardiovascular risk (and 
arteriosclerosis, to some extent) can be reversed, as we will demonstrate below.
Blood Pressure and arterial stiffness. In children, diagnostic criteria for elevated 
BP in general and prehypertension in particular are based on the concept that BP in 
children increases with age and body size, making it impossible to utilize a single-
 BP level to define hypertension, as done in adults [78, 79]. Unfortunately, there are 
no European reference values for BP that incorporate age, sex, and height, through-
out the entire pediatric age range. Thus, hypertension definition is based on the 
normal distribution of BP in healthy children. Hypertension in children is defined as 
SBP and/or DBP persistently at least 95th percentile for sex, age, and height mea-
sured on at least three separate occasions [78, 79]. Children with average SBP and/
or DBP at least 90th, but less than 95th are classified as having high-normal 
BP. Thus, it is expected that about 5% of children have stage 2 prehypertension, 
according to US Guidelines.
Falkner [2] recently pointed out that, given current estimates, about 10% of ado-
lescents have hypertension or prehypertension, and reported various child and ado-
lescent exposures playing a role in high BP, such as stress [80], dietary salt intake, 
fructose, lifestyles including food sources (processed and fast foods), sleep patterns, 
and reductions in physical activity. Particularly, vascular injury may be present in 
children and adolescent in the early phase of prehypertension and could be consid-
ered a risk factor for later hypertension in adulthood [2]. Conversely, elevated BP in 
childhood has been associated with increased adult arterial stiffness [81–84]. Thus, 
a vicious feedback loop is exemplified here, through which both arterial stiffness 
and high BP in childhood increase the occurrence of each other in adulthood. The 
early publications of the Bogalusa Heart Study [85] described the tracking phenom-
enon of blood pressure from childhood to adulthood, and showed that children 
above the 80th percentile of BP (i.e., including prehypertensives) were the most 
likely to develop hypertension later on. And then, many other studies have devoted 
to explain the early influence of BP on the development of early damage to the 
medial wall of large arteries. In the Bogalusa Heart Study, Li et al. [84] demon-
strated that SBP in childhood as well as the time of exposure to elevated SBP were 
the main predictors of increased arterial stiffness in adulthood. The Cardiovascular 8 Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases of Prehypertension116
Risk in Young Finns Study has followed 2255 subjects from childhood to adulthood 
(mean follow-up of 21 years), correlating the elevation of several CVRF, including 
childhood blood pressure to development of decreased distensibility and increased 
arterial stiffness in early adulthood [83]. More recently, Chu and coworkers [81] 
have described the influence of several risk factors during childhood on the develop-
ment of arterial stiffness, 26 years later; 4623 children from the Hanzhong province 
have been characterized and followed for this time period, showing that those with 
BP above the 75th percentile (i.e., including children with prehypertension) had 
higher levels of arterial stiffness revealed in adulthood.
Metabolic syndrome and arterial stiffness. Much evidence has been published 
concerning the frequent coexistence of prehypertension and several other cardiovas-
cular risk factors in childhood. Srinivasan and coworkers of the Bogalusa Heart 
Study [86] followed 3255 children until adulthood; analyzing the 721 prehyperten-
sives included, the authors could verify that these subjects, throughout their devel-
opment had significantly higher adiposity measures, blood pressure levels, and 
triglycerides beginning in childhood; higher glucose in adolescence; and higher 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and insulin metabolism abnormalities in adult-
hood. In a collaborative effort, the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study, the 
Bogalusa Heart Study, and the Childhood Determinants of Adult Health (CDAH) 
Study looked into the influence of childhood dyslipidemia on the development of 
arterial stiffness during adulthood; 1711 children with mean age between 13 and 
15 years at study entrance were followed for 17–21 years; adolescents with dyslip-
idemia and overweight/obese had markedly higher intima-media thickness at 
35 years of age than their counterparts without dyslipidemia, or with dyslipidemia 
but normal—weight [87]. The Bogalusa Heart Study and the Cardiovascular Risk in 
Young Finns Study subsequently evaluated 1781 participants aged 9–18 years at 
baseline with the objective of understanding the influence of childhood Metabolic 
Syndrome (MS) in the development of subclinical atherosclerosis and type 2 
Diabetes Mellitus 14–27 years later; individuals with the MS had 2–3 times higher 
risk of presenting higher cIMT or T2DM, with prehypertension/hypertension fac-
toring in specifically for higher arterial stiffness. Interestingly higher BMI (over -
weight/obesity) at study entrance was a variable as discriminative of the risk of both 
endpoints (cIMT and T2DM) as MS [88], a fact that would be corroborated with 
more clarity in 1617 participants followed during 31 years in the Cardiovascular 
Risk in Young Finns Study [89].
Ferreira et al. [82] examined whether the trajectories, from adolescence to young 
adulthood, of BP, body fatness and fat distribution, blood lipids, cardiorespiratory 
fitness, and heart rate determined levels of arterial stiffness in young adults. They 
investigated 373 apparently healthy adults in whom cardiovascular risk factors were 
repeatedly examined between the ages of 13 and 36 years during the Amsterdam 
Growth and Health Longitudinal study, and measured carotid stiffness 24  years 
later, at the age of 36 years. Compared with individuals with less stiff carotid arter -
ies, those with stiffer carotid arteries at the age of 36 years were characterized from 
ages 13 to 36 years by greater levels of and steeper increases in BP and central fat-
ness, independently of each other and other risk factors. These increases were 
S. Laurent and P. G. Cunha117
already present in adolescence, preceded the development of poorer levels of blood 
lipids, cardiorespiratory fitness, and heart rate, which were evident during adult-
hood only, and explained to a great extent the deleterious association between these 
risk factors and carotid stiffness at the age of 36 years.
Finally, at least two large review and collaborative studies have addressed the 
complex relationships of several cardiovascular risk factors in childhood with the 
development of arterial stiffness in adulthood. The Cardiovascular Risk in Young 
Finns Study, the Childhood Determinants of Adult Health Study, the Bogalusa Heart 
Study, and the Muscatine Study for the International Childhood Cardiovascular 
Cohort (i3C) Consortium evaluated the capability of a childhood risk score (defined 
as total cholesterol, triglycerides, BMI, and systolic BP in the highest quintile) to 
predict adult high levels of carotid intima-media thickness (IMT), showing that 
exposure to these risk factors between the ages of 9 and 18 years were significantly 
associated with increased adult carotid IMT [90]. In a large systematic review of 65 
observational studies, Lamotte and colleagues [91] confirmed the association 
between the prevalence of several cardiovascular risk factors (obesity, diabetes mel-
litus, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and chronic renal disease) and the existence of 
subclinical arteriosclerosis (increased carotid IMT) during childhood and adoles-
cence, when compared to healthy controls [91].
Early interventions to reduce prehypertension and arterial stiffness. From all of 
the above described, six particular aspects need to be surveyed and addressed during 
childhood to prevent the early development of prehypertensiom, adverse cardio-
metabolic profiles, and early manifestations of arteriosclerosis: (1) The concept of 
lifetime risk of CVD [92] and the importance of Ideal Cardiovascular Health met-
rics [93]; (2) The importance of prenatal care and early life surveillance (Low birth 
weight and small for gestational age children and the influence of the mismatch 
growth hypothesis on the development of increased blood pressure and early mani-
festations of arterial stiffness—[94, 95]); (3) Reducing measures of adiposity and 
insulin resistance; (4) Promotion of Physical activity; (5) Monitor and reduce Blood 
Pressure; (6) Assume, for each subject, a life course approach to track and control 
cardiovascular risk factors and promote ideal cardiovascular health, remembering 
critical points in the human life-course for the development of large artery dam-
age—the race horse hypothesis, discussed by Ferreira and coworkers [82] remem-
bers the clinician that the rate of change of a given risk factor is also important to 
monitor, as it pinpoints subjects racing faster to increased risk conditions and need 
of interventional measures.
Several key studies have demonstrated that it is possible to obtain a reduction of 
the risk of subclinical arteriosclerosis and cardiometabolic disease in adulthood, 
through early intervention on reducing cardiovascular risk exposure during child-
hood. A brief review of these meaningful results can be seen in Table  8.3 
[96–103].
It is thus of crucial importance to prevent or reduce childhood obesity in 
order to decrease the prevalence of high BP in childhood. Weight control in 
overweight and obese children, along with dietary changes [ 104] and increases 
in physical activity [ 105], has benefit on BP levels in childhood, likely through 8 Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases of Prehypertension118
the reduction of the metabolic syndrome. Indeed, Koistoinen and coworkers 
[106] showed, in 945 subjects participating to the Cardiovascular Risk in Young 
Finns study and having their baseline data in 1986 (then aged 9–18 years) and 
adult follow-up in 2007 (then aged 30–39 years), that metabolic syndrome in Table 8.3 Reduction of the risk of subclinical arteriosclerosis and cardiometabolic disease in 
adulthood
Author/year Study type Participants Result
1.Aatola 
(2010) [96]
(CVRYFS)Longitudinal
(27 years 
follow-up)1691 subjects
(3–18 years old at 
study entrance)Decreased number of risk factor and 
reversal of obesity status from 
childhood to adulthood are 
associated with lower PWV in 
adulthood
2.Koskinen 
(2010) [97]
(CVRYFS)Longitudinal
(6 years 
follow-up)1673 subjects Subjects who recovered from MetS, 
presented lower AStiff and better 
aortic distensibility than those who 
persisted with or had de novo MetS
3.Juonala 
(2011) [98]
(ICCCC)Longitudinal
(23 years 
follow-up)6328 subjects
(from the 
CVRYFS, BHS, 
MS and CDAH)Subjects who reduced adiposity 
status from childhood to adulthood, 
eliminated added risk of T2DM, 
HTN, AStiff, and dyslipidemia in 
adulthood
4.Laitinen 
(2012) [99]
(CVRYFS)Longitudinal
(21 years 
follow-up)856 subjects
(15 years at study 
entrance)Higher number of ideal CV health 
metrics were associated with reduced 
risk of HTN, T2DM, MS, AStiff, and 
dyslipidemia in adulthood
5.Magnussen 
(2012) [100]
(BHS & 
CVRYFS)Longitudinal
(24.4 years 
follow-up)1757 subjects
(aged 9–18 at 
study entrance)Subjects with MetS at childhood that 
was reversed by adulthood, had the 
same risk of developing T2DM and 
Astiff than those who never had 
MetS
6.Oikonen 
(2013) [101]
(ICCCC)Cross-sectional
(young adults 
from different 
cohorts)5785 subjects
(from the PFS, 
MCCS, BHS, 
CVRYFS and 
CDAHThe number of ideal CV health 
metrics were inversely associated 
with cIMT
7.Aatola 
(2014) [102]
(CVRYFS)Longitudinal
(21 years 
follow-up)1143 subjects During follow-up, for each point 
increase in CV health metrics, a 
reduction of 0.09 m/s in PWV was 
verified
8.Kelly (2015) 
[103]
(CDAH)Longitudinal
(20 years 
follow-up)798 subjects
(9 years at study 
entrance)Subjects with elevated BP in 
childhood who adapted healthy 
lifestyles had a decreased risk of 
developing HTN in adulthood
AStiff arterial stiffness, BHS Bogalusa Heart Study, BP blood pressure, CDAH childhood determi-
nants of adult health, CIMT carotid intima-media thickness, CV cardiovascular, CVRYFS cardio-
vascular risk in Young Finns Study, HTN hypertension, ICCC International Childhood 
Cardiovascular Cohort Consortium, MCCS Minneapolis Childhood Cohort Studies, MetS 
Metabolic Syndrome, MS Muscatine Study, PFS Princeton Follow-up Study, PWV pulse wave 
velocity, T2DM Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
S. Laurent and P. G. Cunha119
childhood predicted increased arterial stiffness in adulthood, and recovery from 
childhood metabolic syndrome was associated with decreased arterial PWV in 
adulthood. In addition, the favorable BP change from childhood to adulthood 
reduces the risk of high adult arterial stiffness, as reported by Aatola et al. [ 107]
recently. During the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns study, these authors 
examined the effect of child and adult BP on PWV assessed in adulthood among 
1540 white adults followed-up for 27  years since baseline (1980, aged 
6–18 years). Individuals with persistently elevated BP and individuals with nor -
mal child but elevated adult BP had increased risk of high adult PWV in com-
parison with individuals with normal (both child and adult) BP.  In contrast, 
individuals with elevated BP in childhood but not in adulthood did not have 
significantly increased risk of high PWV .
The lack of physical activity participates to epidemics of overweight, obesity and 
prehypertension in children and adolescent. An increase in physical activity is of 
crucial importance, not only in children with metabolic syndrome, but also in all 
children. In this regard, the data obtained in 1417 children (aged 9–15 years) and 
999 young adults (aged 18–24 years) from the prospective Cardiovascular Risk in 
Young Finns study, are of great interest [108]. Participants had questionnaire mea-
sures of leisure-time physical activity available from 1986 and ultrasound-derived 
indices of carotid stiffness measured in 2007. Physical activity at age 18–24 years 
was directly associated with carotid stiffness 21 years later in males and females, 
independently of confounding factors. Thus, higher levels of physical activity in 
youth may benefit future cardiovascular health.
 Conclusion
The evidence shown here describes a bidirectional relationship between prehy-
pertension and arterial stiffness, but it also shows that even if they interact to 
generate higher blood pressure levels or higher large artery damage, they are also 
not exclusively dependent on each other to progress and increase the cardiovas-
cular risk of an individual per se—this underlines the importance of measuring 
both, especially in subjects at risk of a faster decline of their vascular health, as 
described in the previous sections of this chapter.
A number of cohort studies and pathophysiological evidences relating arterial 
stiffness to cardiovascular risk factors, inflammation and incident hypertension 
suggest that arterial stiffness measurement could help identify normotensive 
individuals at risk of incident hypertension. These subjects should be targeted for 
the implementation of interventions targeting CV risk factors, with the objective 
of preventing or delaying the progression of subclinical arterial stiffening, thus 
preventing or delaying the onset of hypertension.
In parallel, we have shown evidence of the association of different cardiovas-
cular risk factors in adulthood, with adverse cardiometabolic profiles promoting 
subclinical arteriosclerosis and early vascular aging, leaving a positive message 
concerning the demonstrated possibility of intervening with higher rates of suc-
cess ate these young ages.8 Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases of Prehypertension120
References
 1. Egan BM, Stevens-Fabry S.  Prehypertension—prevalence, health risks, and management 
strategies. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015;12:289–300.
 2. Falkner B. Recent clinical and translational advances in pediatric hypertension. Hypertension. 
2015;65:926–31.
 3. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, Evans JC, O’Donnell CJ, Kannel WB, Levy D.  Impact 
of high-normal blood pressure on the risk of cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 
2001;345:1291–7.
 4. Egan BM, Julius S. Prehypertension: risk stratification and management considerations. Curr 
Hypertens Rep. 2008;10(5):359–66.
 5. Lee M, Saver JL, Chang B, Chang KH, Hao Q, Ovbiagele B. Presence of baseline prehyper -
tension and risk of incident stroke: a meta-analysis. Neurology. 2011;77(14):1330–7.
 6. Lorenzo C, Aung K, Stern MP, Haffner SM. Pulse pressure, prehypertension, and mortality: 
the San Antonio heart study. Am J Hypertens. 2009;22(11):1219–26.
 7. Zimlichman R. Treatment of hypertension and metabolic syndrome: lowering blood pressure 
is not enough for organ protection, new approach-arterial destiffening. Curr Hypertens Rep. 
2014;16:479–84.
 8. Liao D, Arnett DK, Tyroler HA, Riley WA, Chambless LE, Szklo M, Heiss G. Arterial stiff-
ness and the development of hypertension. The ARIC study. Hypertension. 1999;34:201–6.
 9. Dernellis J, Panaretou M. Aortic stiffness is an independent predictor of progression to hyper -
tension in nonhypertensive subjects. Hypertension. 2005;45:426–31.
 10. Najjar SS, Scuteri A, Shetty V , Wright JG, Muller DC, Fleg JL, Spurgeon HP, Ferrucci L, 
Lakatta EG. Pulse wave velocity is an independent predictor of the longitudinal increase in 
systolic blood pressure and of incident hypertension in the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of 
Aging. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;51:1377–83.
 11. Kaess BM, Rong J, Larson MG, Hamburg NM, Vita JA, Levy D, Benjamin EJ, Vasan RS, 
Mitchell GF. Aortic stiffness, blood pressure progression, and incident hypertension. JAMA. 
2012;308:875–81.
 12. Laurent S, Cockcroft J, Van Bortel L, Boutouyrie P, Giannattasio C, Hayoz D, Pannier B, 
Vlachopoulos C, Wilkinson I, Struijker-Boudier H. Expert Consensus Document on arterial 
stiffnes: methodological aspects and clinical applications. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:2588–605.
 13. Nichols WW, O’Rourke MF. McDonald’s blood flow in arteries; Theoretical, experimental 
and clinical principles. 5th ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2005. 624 p.
 14. Herbert A, Cruickshank K, Laurent S, Boutouyrie P, on behalf of The Reference Values for 
Arterial Measurements Collaboration. Establishing reference values for central blood pres-
sure and its amplification in a general healthy population and according to cardiovascular 
risk-factors. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:3122–33.
 15. McEniery CM, Yasmin, McDonnell B, Munnery M, Wallace SM, Rowe CV , Cockcroft JR, 
Wilkinson IB.  Central pressure: variability and impact of cardiovascular risk factors: the 
Anglo-Cardiff Collaborative Trial II. Hypertension. 2008;51(6):1476–82.
 16. Yano Y , Neeland IJ, Ayers C, Peshock R, Berry JD, Lloyd-Jones DM, Greenland P, Mitchell 
GF, V ongpatanasin W.  Hemodynamic and mechanical properties of the proximal aorta in 
young and middle-aged adults with isolated systolic hypertension: the Dallas Heart Study. 
Hypertension. 2017;70:158–65.
 17. Redheuil A, Yu WC, Wu CO, Mousseaux E, de Cesare A, Yan R, Kachenoura N, Bluemke 
D, Lima JA. Reduced ascending aortic strain and distensibility: earliest manifestations of 
vascular aging in humans. Hypertension. 2010;55(2):319–26.
 18. Urbina EM, Khoury PR, McCoy C, Daniels SR, Kimball TR, Dolan LM.  Cardiac and 
vascular consequences of pre-hypertension in youth. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 
2011;13(5):332–42.
 19. Drukteinis JS, Roman MJ, Fabsitz RR, Lee ET, Best LG, Russell M, Devereux RB. Cardiac 
and systemic hemodynamic characteristics of hypertension and prehypertension in adoles-
cents and young adults: the Strong Heart Study. Circulation. 2007;115(2):221–7.
S. Laurent and P. G. Cunha121
 20. Manios E, Tsivgoulis G, Koroboki E, Stamatelopoulos K, Papamichael C, Toumanidis S, 
Stamboulis E, Vemmos K, Zakopoulos N. Impact of prehypertension on common carotid 
artery intima-media thickness and left ventricular mass. Stroke. 2009;40(4):1515–8.
 21. Knight EL, Kramer HM, Curhan GC. High-normal blood pressure and microalbuminuria. 
Am J Kidney Dis. 2003;41(3):588–95.
 22. Peralta CA, Adeney KL, Shlipak MG, Jacobs D Jr, Duprez D, Bluemke D, Polak J, Psaty 
B, Kestenbaum BR.  Structural and functional vascular alterations and incident hyperten-
sion in normotensive adults: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. Am J Epidemiol. 
2010;171(1):63–71.
 23. Tomiyama H, Hashimoto H, Matsumoto C, Odaira M, Yoshida M, Shiina K, Nagata M, 
Yamashina A, Doba N, Hinohara S. Effects of aging and persistent prehypertension on arte-
rial stiffening. Atherosclerosis. 2011;217(1):130–4.
 24. AlGhatrif M, Strait JB, Morrell CH, Canepa M, Wright J, Elango P, Scuteri A, Najjar SS, 
Ferrucci L, Lakatta EG. Longitudinal trajectories of arterial stiffness and the role of blood 
pressure: the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. Hypertension. 2013;62(5):934–41.
 25. Humphrey JD, Dufresne ER, Schwartz MA. Mechanotransduction and extracellular matrix 
homeostasis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014;15:802–12.
 26. Folkow B. “Structural factor” in primary and secondary hypertension. Hypertension. 
1990;16:89–101.
 27. Wolinsky H. Long-term effects of hypertension on the rat aortic wall and their relation to 
concurrent aging changes. Morphological and chemical studies. Circ Res. 1972;30:301–9.
 28. Lacolley P, Challande P, Osborne-Pellegrin M, Regnault V . Genetics and pathophysiology of 
arterial stiffness. Cardiovasc Res. 2009;81:637–48.
 29. Laurent S, Briet M, Boutouyrie P. Large and small artery cross-talk and recent morbidity-
mortality trials in hypertension. Hypertension. 2009;54:388–92.
 30. Muiesan ML, Salvetti M, Rizzoni D, Paini A, Agabiti-Rosei C, Aggiusti C, Bertacchini F, 
Stassaldi D, Gavazzi A, Porteri E, De Ciuceis C, Agabiti-Rosei E. Pulsatile hemodynamics 
and microcirculation: evidence for a close relationship in hypertensive patients. Hypertension. 
2013;61:130–6.
 31. Laurent S, Safar M.  Large artery damage: measurement and clinical importance in text-
book of hypertension. In: Mancia G, Grassi G, Redon J, editors. Informa Healthcare. 2014. 
p. 191–202.
 32. Schillaci G, Bilo G, Pucci G, Laurent S, Macquin-Mavier I, Boutouyrie P, Battista F, 
Desamericq G, Dolbeau G, Faini A, Salvi P, Mannarino E, Parati G. Relationship between 
short-term blood pressure variability and large-artery stiffness in human hypertension: find-
ings from 2 large databases. Hypertension. 2012;60:369–77.
 33. Christensen KL. Reducing pulse pressure in hypertension may normalize small artery struc-
ture. Hypertension. 1991;18:722–7.
 34. James MA, Watt PA, Potter JF, Thurston H, Swales JD. Pulse pressure and resistance artery 
structure in the elderly. Hypertension. 1995;26:301–6.
 35. Salvetti M, Agabiti Rosei C, Paini A, Aggiusti C, Cancarini A, Duse S, Semeraro F, Rizzoni 
D, Agabiti Rosei E, Muiesan ML. Relationship of wall-to-lumen ratio of retinal arterioles 
with clinic and 24-hour blood pressure. Hypertension. 2014;63:1110–5.
 36. Grassi G, Buzzi S, Dell’Oro R, Mineo C, Dimitriadis K, Seravalle G, Lonati L, Cuspidi 
C. Structural alterations of the retinal microcirculation in the “prehypertensive” high-normal 
blood pressure state. Curr Pharm Des. 2013;19(13):2375–81.
 37. Sharrett AR, Hubbard LD, Cooper LS, Sorlie PD, Brothers RJ, Nieto FJ, Pinsky JL, Klein 
R.  Retinal arteriolar diameters and elevated blood pressure: the Atherosclerosis Risk in 
Communities Study. Am J Epidemiol. 1999;150(3):263–70.
 38. Harvey A, Montezano AC, Touyz RM. Vascular biology of ageing—implications in hyper -
tension. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015;83:112–21.
 39. Vlachopoulos C, Dima I, Aznaouridis K, Vasiliadou C, Ioakeimidis N, Aggeli C, Toutouza 
M, Stefanadis C. Acute systemic inflammation increases arterial stiffness and decreases wave 
reflections in healthy individuals. Circulation. 2005;112(14):2193–200.8 Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases of Prehypertension122
 40. Blankenberg S, Rupprecht HJ, Poirier O, Bickel C, Smieja M, Hafner G, Meyer J, Cambien 
F, Tiret L. Plasma concentrations and genetic variation of matrix metalloproteinase 9 and 
prognosis of patients with cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 2003;107(12):1579–85.
 41. van Bussel BC, Schouten F, Henry RM, Schalkwijk CG, de Boer MR, Ferreira I, 
Smulders YM, Twisk JW, Stehouwer CD. Endothelial dysfunction and low-grade inflam-
mation are associated with greater arterial stiffness over a 6-year period. Hypertension. 
2011;58(4):588–95.
 42. Kim M, Jung S, Kim SY , Lee SH, Lee JH.  Prehypertension-associated elevation in cir -
culating lysophosphatidlycholines, Lp-PLA2 activity, and oxidative stress. PLoS One. 
2014;9(5):e96735.
 43. Kim M, Yoo HJ, Ahn HY , Park J, Lee SH, Lee JH. Associations among oxidative stress, 
Lp-PLA2 activity and arterial stiffness according to blood pressure status at a 3.5-year fol-
low-up in subjects with prehypertension. Atherosclerosis. 2017;257:179–85.
 44. Tomiyama H, Shiina K, Matsumoto-Nakano C, Ninomiya T, Komatsu S, Kimura K, 
Chikamori T, Yamashina A. The contribution of inflammation to the development of hyper -
tension mediated by increased arterial stiffness. J Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6(7):e005729.
 45. Muhammad IF, Borne Y , Ostling G, Kennback C, Gottsater M, Persson M, Nilsson PM, 
Engstrom G.  Acute phase proteins as prospective risk markers for arterial stiffness: The 
Malmo Diet and Cancer cohort. PLoS One. 2017;12(7):e0181718.
 46. Ambrosino P, Tasso M, Lupoli R, Di Minno A, Baldassarre D, Tremoli E, Di Minno 
MN.  Non-invasive assessment of arterial stiffness in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of literature studies. Ann Med. 2015;47(6):457–67.
 47. Zanoli L, Rastelli S, Granata A, Inserra G, Empana JP, Boutouyrie P, Laurent S, Castellino 
P. Arterial stiffness in inflammatory bowel disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Hypertens. 2016;34(5):822–9.
 48. Tam LS, Kitas GD, Gonzalez-Gay MA. Can suppression of inflammation by anti-TNF pre-
vent progression of subclinical atherosclerosis in inflammatory arthritis? Rheumatology 
(Oxford). 2014;53(6):1108–19.
 49. Maia-Leite LH, Catez E, Boyd A, Haddour N, Curjol A, Lang S, Nuernberg M, Duvivier 
C, Desvarieux M, Kirstetter M, Girard PM, Cohen A, Boccara F. Aortic stiffness aging is 
influenced by past profound immunodeficiency in HIV-infected individuals: results from 
the EV AS-HIV (EValuation of Aortic Stiffness in HIV-infected individuals). J Hypertens. 
2016;34(7):1338–46.
 50. Wang J, Yu W, Gao M, Zhang F, Gu C, Yu Y , Wei Y . Impact of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome 
on endothelial function, arterial stiffening, and serum inflammatory markers: an updated 
meta-analysis and metaregression of 18 studies. J Am Heart Assoc. 2015;4(11):e002454.
 51. Liu C, Kellems RE, Xia Y . Inflammation, autoimmunity, and hypertension: the essential role 
of tissue transglutaminase. Am J Hypertens. 2017;30(8):756–64.
 52. Laurent S, Marais L, Boutouyrie P. the non-invasive assessment of vascular ageing. Can J 
Cardiol. 2016;32:669–79.
 53. Boutouyrie P, Tropeano AI, Asmar R, Gautier I, Benetos A, Lacolley P, Laurent S. Aortic 
stiffness is an independent predictor of primary coronary events in hypertensive patients: a 
longitudinal study. Hypertension. 2002;39:10–5.
 54. Laurent S, Boutouyrie P, Asmar R, Gautier I, Laloux B, Guize L, Ducimetiere P, Benetos 
A. Aortic stiffness is an independent predictor of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in 
hypertensive patients. Hypertension. 2001;37:1236–41.
 55. Vlachopoulos C, Aznaouridis K, Stefanadis C. Prediction of cardiovascular events and all-
cause mortality with arterial stiffness: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2010;55:1318–27.
 56. Pannier B, Guerin AP, Marchais SJ, et al. Stiffness of capacitive and conduit arteries: prog-
nostic significance for end-stage renal disease patients. Hypertension. 2005;45:592–6.
 57. Asmar R, Benetos A, Topouchian J, Laurent P, Pannier B, Brisac AM, Target R, Levy 
B.  Assessment of arterial distensibility by automatic pulse wave velocity measurement. 
Validation and clinical application studies. Hypertension. 1995;26:485–90.
S. Laurent and P. G. Cunha123
 58. Pauca AL, O’Rourke MF, Kon ND. Prospective evaluation of a method for estimating ascend-
ing aortic pressure from the radial artery pressure waveform. Hypertension. 2001;38:932–7.
 59. Cruickshank K, Riste L, Anderson SG, Wright JS, Dunn G, Gosling RG. Aortic pulse-wave 
velocity and its relationship to mortality in diabetes and glucose intolerance: an integrated 
index of vascular function? Circulation. 2002;106:2085–90.
 60. Vlachopoulos C, Aznaouridis K, Terentes-Printzios D, Ioakeimidis N, Stefanadis 
C. Prediction of cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality with brachial-ankle elasticity 
index: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hypertension. 2012;60:556–62.
 61. Ben-Shlomo Y , Spears M, Boustred C, May M, Anderson SG, Benjamin EJ, Boutouyrie P, 
Cameron J, Chen CH, Cruickshank JK, Hwang SJ, Lakatta EG, Laurent S, Maldonado J, 
Mitchell GF, Najjar SS, Newman AB, Ohishi M, Pannier B, Pereira T, Vasan RS, Shokawa 
T, Sutton-Tyrell K, Verbeke F, Wang KL, Webb DJ, Hansen TW, Zoungas S, McEniery CM, 
Cockcroft JR, Wilkinson IB.  Aortic pulse wave velocity improves cardiovascular event 
prediction: an individual participant meta-analysis of prospective observational data from 
17,635 subjects. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63(7):636–46.
 62. Bussy C, Boutouyrie P, Lacolley P, Challande P, Laurent S. Intrinsic stiffness of the carotid 
arterial wall material in essential hypertensives. Hypertension. 2000;35:1049–54.
 63. Laurent S, Boutouyrie P, Lacolley P.  Structural and genetic bases of arterial stiffness. 
Hypertension. 2005;45:1050–5.
 64. Laurent S, Boutouyrie P. The structural factor in hypertension: large and small artery altera-
tions. Circ Res. 2015;116:1007–21.
 65. Cunha PG, Boutouyrie P, Nilsson PM, Laurent S. Early Vascular Ageing (EV A): definitions 
and clinical applicability. Curr Hypertens Rev. 2017;13:8. https://doi.org/10.2174/15734021
13666170413094319.
 66. Cunha PG, Cotter J, Oliveira P, Vila I, Boutouyrie P, Laurent S, Nilsson P, Scuteri A, Sousa 
N. Pulse wave velocity distribution in a cohort study–From arterial stiffness to early vascular 
ageing (EV A). J Hypertens. 2015;33:1438–45.
 67. Nilsson P, Boutouyrie P, Cunha P, Kotsis V , Narkiewicz K, Parati G, Rietzschel E, Scuteri 
A, Laurent S. Early vascular ageing (EV A) in translation—from laboratory investigations to 
clinical applications in cardiovascular prevention. J Hypertens. 2013;31:1517–26.
 68. Nilsson P, Boutouyrie P, Laurent S. Vascular aging: a tale of EV A and ADAM in cardiovas-
cular risk assessment and prevention. Hypertension. 2009;54:3–10.
 69. Zethelius B, Berglund L, Sundström J, Ingelsson E, Basu S, Larsson A, Venge P, Arnlöv 
J. Use of multiple biomarkers to improve the prediction of death from cardiovascular causes. 
N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2107–716.
 70. Sehestedt T, Jeppesen J, Hansen TW, Rasmussen S, Wachtell K, Ibsen H, Torp-Pedersen 
C, Olsen MH. Thresholds for pulse wave velocity, urine albumin creatinine ratio and left 
ventricular mass index using SCORE, Framingham and ESH/ESC risk charts. J Hypertens. 
2012;30(10):1928–36.
 71. Sehestedt T, Jeppesen J, Hansen TW, Wachtell K, Ibsen H, Torp-Pedersen C, Hildebrandt P, 
Olsen MH. Risk prediction is improved by adding markers of subclinical organ damage to 
SCORE. Eur Heart J. 2010;31(7):883–91.
 72. Wang TJ. Assessing the role of circulating, genetic, and imaging biomarkers in cardiovascu-
lar risk prediction. Circulation. 2011;123:551–65.
 73. Olsen M, Angell S, Asma S, Boutouyrie P, Burger D, Chirinos J, et al. A call to action and 
a life-course strategy to address the global burden of raised blood pressure on current and 
future generations. The Lancet Commission on Hypertension. Lancet. 2016;388:2665–712.
 74. Safar ME, Thomas F, Blacher J, Nzietchueng R, Bureau JM, Pannier B, Benetos A. Metabolic 
syndrome and age-related progression of aortic stiffness. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47(1):72–5.
 75. Scuteri A, Cunha PG, Rosei EA, Badariere J, Bekaert S, Cockcroft JR, Cotter J, Cucca F, De 
Buyzere ML, De Meyer T, Ferrucci L, Franco O, Gale N, Gillebert TC, Hofman A, Langlois 
M, Laucevicius A, Laurent S, Matta Ceraso FU, Morrell CH, Muiesan ML, Munnery 
MM, Navickas R, Oliveira P, Orru’ M, Pilia MG, Rietzschel ER, Ryliskyte L, Salvetti M, 
Schlessinger D, Sousa N, Stefanadis C, Strait J, Van daele C, Villa I, Vlachopoulos C, Witteman 8 Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases of Prehypertension124
J, Xaplanteris P, Nilsson P, Lakatta EG, MARE Consortium. Arterial stiffness and influences 
of the metabolic syndrome: a cross-countries study. Atherosclerosis. 2014;233:654–60.
 76. Scuteri A, Najjar SS, Muller DC, Andres R, Hougaku H, Metter EJ, Lakatta EG. Metabolic 
syndrome amplifies the age-associated increases in vascular thickness and stiffness. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2004;43:1388–95.
 77. Smulyan H, Lieber A, Safar ME. Hypertension, diabetes type II, and their association: role of 
arterial stiffness. Am J Hypertens. 2016;29:5–13.
 78. Lurbe E, Agabiti-Rosei E, Cruickshank JK, Dominiczak A, Erdine S, Hirth A, Invitti C, Litwin 
M, Mancia G, Pall D, Rascher W, Redon J, Schaefer F, Seeman T, Sinha M, Stabouli S, Webb 
NJ, Wühl E, Zanchetti A. 2016 European Society of Hypertension guidelines for the manage-
ment of high blood pressure in children and adolescents. J Hypertens. 2016a;34:1887–920.
 79. Lurbe E, Torro MI, Alvarez-Pitti J, Redon P, Redon J. Central blood pressure and pulse wave 
amplification across the spectrum of peripheral blood pressure in overweight and obese 
youth. J Hypertens. 2016b;34:1389–95.
 80. Su S, Wang X, Kapuku GK, Treiber FA, Pollock DM, Harshfield GA, McCall WV , Pollock 
JS. Adverse childhood experiences are associated with detrimental hemodynamics and ele-
vated circulating endothelin-1 in adolescents and young adults. Hypertension. 2014;64:201–7.
 81. Chu C, Dai Y , Mu J, Yang R, Wang M, Yang J, Ren Y , Xie B, Dong Z, Yang F, Wang D, Yan 
D, Guo TS, Wang Y . Associations of risk factors in childhood with arterial stiffness 26 years 
later: the Hanzhong adolescent hypertension cohort. J Hypertens. 2017;35(Suppl 1):S10–S5.
 82. Ferreira I, van de Laar RJ, Prins MH, Twisk JW, Stehouwer CD. Carotid stiffness in young 
adults: a life-course analysis of its early determinants: the Amsterdam Growth and Health 
Longitudinal Study. Hypertension. 2012;59:54–61.
 83. Juonala M, Jarvisalo MJ, Maki-Torkko N, Kahonen M, Viikari JS, Raitakari OT. Risk factors 
identified in childhood and decreased carotid artery elasticity in adulthood: the Cardiovascular 
Risk in Young Finns Study. Circulation. 2005;112(10):1486–93.
 84. Li S, Chen W, Srinivasan SR, Berenson GS. Childhood blood pressure as a predictor of arte-
rial stiffness in young adults: the Bogalusa heart study. Hypertension. 2004;43(3):541–6.
 85. Bao W, Threefoot SA, Srinivasan SR, Berenson GS.  Essential hypertension predicted by 
tracking of elevated blood pressure from childhood to adulthood: the Bogalusa Heart Study. 
Am J Hypertens. 1995;8(7):657–65.
 86. Srinivasan SR, Myers L, Berenson GS. Changes in metabolic syndrome variables since child-
hood in prehypertensive and hypertensive subjects: the Bogalusa Heart Study. Hypertension. 
2006;48(1):33–9.
 87. Magnussen CG, Venn A, Thomson R, Juonala M, Srinivasan SR, Viikari JS, Berenson GS, 
Dwyer T, Raitakari OT. The association of pediatric low- and high-density lipoprotein cho-
lesterol dyslipidemia classifications and change in dyslipidemia status with carotid intima-
media thickness in adulthood evidence from the cardiovascular risk in Young Finns study, the 
Bogalusa Heart study, and the CDAH (Childhood Determinants of Adult Health) study. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2009;53(10):860–9.
 88. Magnussen CG, Koskinen J, Chen W, Thomson R, Schmidt MD, Srinivasan SR, Kivimaki 
M, Mattsson N, Kahonen M, Laitinen T, Taittonen L, Ronnemaa T, Viikari JS, Berenson 
GS, Juonala M, Raitakari OT. Pediatric metabolic syndrome predicts adulthood metabolic 
syndrome, subclinical atherosclerosis, and type 2 diabetes mellitus but is no better than body 
mass index alone: the Bogalusa Heart Study and the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns 
Study. Circulation. 2010;122(16):1604–11.
 89. Koskinen J, Magnussen CG, Sabin MA, Kahonen M, Hutri-Kahonen N, Laitinen T, Taittonen 
L, Jokinen E, Lehtimaki T, Viikari JS, Raitakari OT, Juonala M. Youth overweight and meta-
bolic disturbances in predicting carotid intima-media thickness, type 2 diabetes, and meta-
bolic syndrome in adulthood: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study. Diabetes Care. 
2014;37(7):1870–7.
 90. Juonala M, Magnussen CG, Venn A, Dwyer T, Burns TL, Davis PH, Chen W, Srinivasan 
SR, Daniels SR, Kahonen M, Laitinen T, Taittonen L, Berenson GS, Viikari JS, Raitakari 
OT. Influence of age on associations between childhood risk factors and carotid intima-media 
S. Laurent and P. G. Cunha125
thickness in adulthood: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study, the Childhood 
Determinants of Adult Health Study, the Bogalusa Heart Study, and the Muscatine Study 
for the International Childhood Cardiovascular Cohort (i3C) Consortium. Circulation. 
2010;122(24):2514–20.
 91. Lamotte C, Iliescu C, Libersa C, Gottrand F.  Increased intima-media thickness of the 
carotid artery in childhood: a systematic review of observational studies. Eur J Pediatr. 
2011;170(6):719–29.
 92. Berry JD, Dyer A, Cai X, Garside DB, Ning H, Thomas A, Greenland P, Van Horn L, 
Tracy RP, Lloyd-Jones DM.  Lifetime risks of cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 
2012;366(4):321–9.
 93. Lloyd-Jones DM, Hong Y , Labarthe D, Mozaffarian D, Appel LJ, Van Horn L, Greenlund K, 
Daniels S, Nichol G, Tomaselli GF, Arnett DK, Fonarow GC, Ho PM, Lauer MS, Masoudi 
FA, Robertson RM, Roger V , Schwamm LH, Sorlie P, Yancy CW, Rosamond WD. Defining 
and setting national goals for cardiovascular health promotion and disease reduction: the 
American Heart Association’s strategic impact goal through 2020 and beyond. Circulation. 
2010;121(4):586–613.
 94. Chen W, Srinivasan SR, Berenson GS. Amplification of the association between birthweight 
and blood pressure with age: the Bogalusa Heart Study. J Hypertens. 2010;28(10):2046–52.
 95. Gamborg M, Byberg L, Rasmussen F, Andersen PK, Baker JL, Bengtsson C, Canoy D, 
Droyvold W, Eriksson JG, Forsen T, Gunnarsdottir I, Jarvelin MR, Koupil I, Lapidus L, 
Nilsen TI, Olsen SF, Schack-Nielsen L, Thorsdottir I, Tuomainen TP, Sorensen TI.  Birth 
weight and systolic blood pressure in adolescence and adulthood: meta-regression analysis of 
sex- and age-specific results from 20 Nordic studies. Am J Epidemiol. 2007;166(6):634–45.
 96. Aatola H, Hutri-Kahonen N, Juonala M, Viikari JS, Hulkkonen J, Laitinen T, Taittonen L, 
Lehtimaki T, Raitakari OT, Kahonen M. Lifetime risk factors and arterial pulse wave velocity in 
adulthood: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study. Hypertension. 2010;55(3):806–11.
 97. Koskinen J, Magnussen CG, Taittonen L, Rasanen L, Mikkila V , Laitinen T, Ronnemaa T, 
Kahonen M, Viikari JS, Raitakari OT, Juonala M. Arterial structure and function after recov-
ery from the metabolic syndrome: the cardiovascular risk in Young Finns Study. Circulation. 
2010;121(3):392–400.
 98. Juonala M, Magnussen CG, Berenson GS, Venn A, Burns TL, Sabin MA, Srinivasan 
SR, Daniels SR, Davis PH, Chen W, Sun C, Cheung M, Viikari JS, Dwyer T, Raitakari 
OT.  Childhood adiposity, adult adiposity, and cardiovascular risk factors. N Engl J Med. 
2011;365(20):1876–85.
 99. Laitinen TT, Pahkala K, Magnussen CG, Viikari JS, Oikonen M, Taittonen L, Mikkila V , 
Jokinen E, Hutri-Kahonen N, Laitinen T, Kahonen M, Lehtimaki T, Raitakari OT, Juonala 
M. Ideal cardiovascular health in childhood and cardiometabolic outcomes in adulthood: the 
Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study. Circulation. 2012;125(16):1971–8.
 100. Magnussen CG, Koskinen J, Juonala M, Chen W, Srinivasan SR, Sabin MA, Thomson 
R, Schmidt MD, Nguyen QM, Xu JH, Skilton MR, Kahonen M, Laitinen T, Taittonen L, 
Lehtimaki T, Ronnemaa T, Viikari JS, Berenson GS, Raitakari OT. A diagnosis of the meta-
bolic syndrome in youth that resolves by adult life is associated with a normalization of high 
carotid intima-media thickness and type 2 diabetes mellitus risk: the Bogalusa heart and 
cardiovascular risk in young Finns studies. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60(17):1631–9.
 101. Oikonen M, Laitinen TT, Magnussen CG, Steinberger J, Sinaiko AR, Dwyer T, Venn A, 
Smith KJ, Hutri-Kahonen N, Pahkala K, Mikkila V , Prineas R, Viikari JS, Morrison JA, Woo 
JG, Chen W, Nicklas T, Srinivasan SR, Berenson G, Juonala M, Raitakari OT. Ideal cardio-
vascular health in young adult populations from the United States, Finland, and Australia and 
its association with cIMT: the International Childhood Cardiovascular Cohort Consortium. J 
Am Heart Assoc. 2013;2(3):e000244.
 102. Aatola H, Hutri-Kahonen N, Juonala M, Laitinen TT, Pahkala K, Mikkila V , Telama R, 
Koivistoinen T, Lehtimaki T, Viikari JS, Raitakari OT, Kahonen M. Prospective relationship 
of change in ideal cardiovascular health status and arterial stiffness: the Cardiovascular Risk 
in Young Finns Study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014;3(2):e000532.8 Arterial Stiffness in Early Phases of Prehypertension126
 103. Kelly RK, Thomson R, Smith KJ, Dwyer T, Venn A, Magnussen CG. Factors affecting track-
ing of blood pressure from childhood to adulthood: the childhood determinants of adult 
health study. J Pediatr. 2015;167(6):1422–8. e2
 104. Couch SC, Saelens BE, Levin L, Dart K, Falciglia G, Daniels SR. The efficacy of a clinic-
based behavioral nutrition intervention emphasizing a DASH-type diet for adolescents with 
elevated blood pressure. J Pediatr. 2008;152:494–501.
 105. Leary SDNA, Smith GD, Mattocks C, Deere K, Blair SN, Riddoch C.  Physical activity 
and blood pressure in childhood. Findings from a population-based study. Hypertension. 
2008;51:92–8.
 106. Koivistoinen T, Hutri-Kähönen N, Juonala M, Aatola H, Kööbi T, Lehtimäki T, Viikari JS, 
Raitakari OT, Kähönen M. Metabolic syndrome in childhood and increased arterial stiffness 
in adulthood: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study. Ann Med. 2011;43:312–9.
 107. Aatola H, Koivistoinen T, Tuominen H, Juonala M, Lehtimäki T, Viikari JSA, Raitakari 
OT, Kähönen M, Hutri-Kähönen N.  Influence of child and adult elevated blood pressure 
on adult arterial stiffness: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study. Hypertension. 
2017;70:531–6.
 108. Pälve KS, Pahkala K, Magnussen CG, Koivistoinen T, Juonala M, Kähönen M, Lehtimäki T, 
Rönnemaa T, Viikari JS, Raitakari OT. Association of physical activity in childhood and early 
adulthood with carotid artery elasticity 21 years later: the cardiovascular risk in Young Finns 
Study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014;3:e000594.
S. Laurent and P. G. Cunha127 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_9
C. Vlachopoulos ( *) · D. Terentes-Printzios · D. Tousoulis 
Hypertension and Cardiometabolic Unit, First Department of Cardiology,  
Hippokration Hospital, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 
Athens, Greece
e-mail: cvlachop@otenet.gr9Central Blood Pressure 
and Prehypertension
Charalambos Vlachopoulos, Dimitrios Terentes-Printzios, 
and Dimitrios Tousoulis
9.1  Prehypertension
Measurement of blood pressure (BP) is one of the most important and powerful 
clinical tools in clinical practice. The classical method that was introduced more 
than 100 years ago with the emergence of the brachial cuff sphygmomanometer is 
still in use by physicians [1]. Sphygmomanometry, despite its initial setbacks, 
stormed throughout the medical community. This was boosted by the early exploita-
tion of insurance companies and was founded on the ease of use, the availability 
with the wide variety of devices, the good reproducibility and its predictive role [1].
Once peripheral (brachial) BP were established as the gold-standard method of 
assessing hypertension and optimal BP status, physicians and relevant societies set 
cutoff points to communicate the risks of hypertension to patients. Prehypertension 
was firstly defined in the 2003 Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, 
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure Guidelines as a systolic BP of 
120–139 mmHg, diastolic BP of 80–89 mmHg, or both [2]. With a different termi-
nology and range, the European guidelines define high-normal BP as a systolic BP 
between 130 and 139 mmHg [3].
BP is a principal risk factor for morbidity and mortality. This relationship is potent, 
continuous, and has been established in a range of age groups and populations. On the 
other hand, BP is a continuous variable and has a normal distribution. Therefore, defi-
nition of “hypertension” in terms of risk prediction is rather arbitrary [ 4]. While 
hypertension is prevalent in middle-aged and elderly adults there is an increase in 
prevalence of prehypertension in younger ages in recent years [ 4]. Overall, 128
prehypertension has an essential deleterious health impact in all ages. Prehypertension 
is associated with a twofold increased risk of cardiovascular events [ 4]. In addition, 
these prehypertensive subjects are more likely to have hypercholesterolemia, increased 
body-mass index, and/or diabetes compared to individuals with normal blood [ 5]. 
Apart from the risks for cardiovascular disease that prehypertension conveys by itself, 
it should be stressed that prehypertension is precursor of hypertension [ 4].
Nonetheless, it should be stressed that the ongoing debate for the ideal target of inter -
ventional studies [ 6] has cast shadow on the true value of the concept of prehypertension 
since there is a tendency to lower the proposed targets to the prehypertension range. For 
such reasons, in the latest guidelines for Hypertension Management from the American 
Heart Association the concept of prehypertension has been challenged [ 7].
9.2  Central Blood Pressures
Peripheral blood pressure may not always be a reliable surrogate of central blood 
pressure [8]. An indolent dispute between measurements of peripheral (brachial) 
and central (aortic, carotid) has resurfaced after the introduction of techniques and 
devises that can easily and accurately estimate noninvasively the central pressure 
waveform [9]. Analysis of the central waveform can provide clinically useful infor -
mation, beyond blood pressure measured in the brachial artery [9, 10]. This addi-
tional prognostic ability of central pressures stems from the fact that they are more 
pathophysiologically relevant to end-organ damages on the brain, heart, and kid-
neys [9–11].
Pathophysiology: Differences between peripheral and aortic pressures vary and 
are greater at younger ages (Fig.  9.1). In that case, systolic pressure may be up to 
40  mmHg higher in the brachial artery than in the aorta, despite the fact that 
High-Nor mal
Blood PressureStage 1
Hyper tension
> 70% ov erlap in
aortic systolic
pressure
80200
190
180
170
160
150Brachial systolic b lood pressure (mmHg)140
130
120
110
100
100 120 140
Aortic systolic b lood pressure (mmHg)160 180 200
Fig. 9.1 Overlap between categories of aortic (central) and brachial (peripheral) blood pressure 
categories. Figure adapted from [14]
C. Vlachopoulos et al.129
diastolic and mean arterial pressures are rather constant [12]. Among other factors, 
this is due to the change of the structure of the arterial wall (elastic aorta compared 
to the stiffer muscular brachial artery) and the resultant increase in arterial stiffness 
as the pressure wave moves away from the heart. This in turn results in a rapid 
increase in the systolic pressure, causing an important pulse pressure amplification 
[12]. Pulse pressure amplification has a large both within- and between-subjects 
variability that stems from differences in age, gender, race, heart rate, body size and 
conditions that modify the vascular system and tone (Table 9.1) [13].
Measurement techniques: There are several ways of measurement or estima-
tion of central blood pressure [14]. The most direct classical method is measure-
ment of BP in the ascending aorta using a pressure-sensing catheter during cardiac 
catheterization. As it is apparent this method is not suitable for screening due to its 
invasive nature and need for technical expertise and it is used nowadays only for 
validation of noninvasive devices. In the last two decades numerous noninvasive 
devices have emerged; pressure waveforms are recorded from sites distal to the 
aorta, such as the radial, brachial, or carotid arteries, and calibrated to BP measured 
by cuff sphygmomanometry [9, 14]. Extremely interesting is also the recent devel-
opment of 24  h measurement of central BP [14]. It remains to be investigated 
whether the 24 h values have better predictive ability for future events than single 
measurements of central BPs as already has been shown for 24 h ambulatory periph-
eral BPs compared to single office blood pressures. As one can expect all these 
methods have their pros and cons and should be carefully and rigorously validated 
with a standardized method before entering the market [15].
Prognostic role of central blood pressures: As already mentioned, central pres-
sures are pathophysiologically more relevant than peripheral pressures for the 
pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease and according to accumulating evidence this 
results in an essential prognostic role for both cardiovascular and all-cause mortal-
ity. A considerable number of studies have examined the ability of central pressures 
to predict the risk of future fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular events (myocardial 
infarction, stroke, revascularization, aortic syndromes) and all-cause mortality [10]. 
Although promising, findings were not consistent in all studies. We meta-analyzed 
11 longitudinal studies that estimated central hemodynamics and had followed 5648 
subjects for a mean follow-up of 45 months and showed the independent predictive 
role of central blood pressures and augmentation index to predict future events. 
When three more recent studies than the respective meta-analysis [13] were included 
(total 9093 subjects and mean follow-up 54.9 months) the relative risk (RRs) of Table 9.1 Factors determining pressure pulse wave 
amplificationAge
Gender
Body size (height)
Heart rate
Blood pressure
Race
Smoking
Dyslipidemia (men only)
Blood glucose9 Central Blood Pressure and Prehypertension130
total cardiovascular events were 1.115 (95% CI 1.029–1.209) for a 10  mmHg- 
increase of central pulse pressure, and 1.303 (95% CI 1.098–1.546) for a 10%-abso-
lute increase of central augmentation index. Furthermore, a 10%-increase of central 
augmentation index was associated with a RR of 1.328 (95% CI 1.167–1.511) for 
all-cause mortality. The important question is whether central pressures have an 
incremental predictive ability over and beyond peripheral pressures. According to 
our meta-analysis, central pulse pressure was found to have a marginally better 
predictive value compared to peripheral pulse pressure (P  =  0.057). Due to the 
strong correlation between central and peripheral pressures, large populations are 
required to provide convincing and meaningful data on the comparison between 
them. This marginal but existent superiority of central blood pressures was sup-
ported by the a recent large individual-data meta-analysis in 22,433 subjects from 
15 studies [16], where although the predictive ability for myocardial infarction was 
similar for central and peripheral systolic BP, there was a statistically significant 
superiority of central pressure compared to peripheral pressure for the prediction of 
stroke, especially in subjects below 61 years. However, it must be acknowledged 
that so far there are no published data of an improved reclassification with the use 
of central BP with the inclusion of peripheral BP in the model.
In addition to hard-end points, central hemodynamic indices have been shown to 
be independently associated with end-organ damage and incident cardiovascular dis-
ease. The late systolic augmentation of the central pressure waveform is associated 
with an increase in left ventricular mass index, and carotid systolic blood pressure is 
an independent predictor of left ventricular wall thickness [ 17]. Moreover, central 
pressure is also more closely related to other essential surrogate endpoints, such as 
vascular hypertrophy, extent of carotid atherosclerosis than brachial pressure [ 18]. In 
fact, in a recent meta-analysis, central BP was shown to be slightly, but consistently, 
superior to the peripheral BP in predicting end-organ damage, such as carotid intima-
media thickness, pulse wave velocity, and left ventricular mass index except for albu-
minuria [ 19]. The close association of central pressures with intermediate 
cardiovascular phenotypes is colorfully illustrated in a recent review (Fig. 9.2) [ 20].
50
45
40
35LV Mass Inde x (gm/m2.7)
3038.2
Unadjusted AdjustedCentral SBP<112
Central SBP ≥11240.744.544
Fig. 9.2 Comparison of left ventricular (LV) mass index in prehypertensives subdivided accord-
ing to whether central systolic blood pressure (SBP) is <112 or ≥112 mmHg. Figure adapted from 
[20]
C. Vlachopoulos et al.131
Modulation of central blood pressures: Despite similar effects on brachial 
pressure, antihypertensive drugs have differential effects on central pressure and 
this may explain the advantage of arterial vasodilating drugs in survival studies 
(Fig.  9.3) [21]. In particular, the relative efficacy of antihypertensive treatment in 
randomized trials has been principally assessed based on its ability to lower brachial 
BP. However, due to the essential role of wave reflections, it could be assumed that 
some classes of antihypertensive regimens with vasodilatory properties could have 
a greater impact on the reduction of aortic BP that is not apparent in peripheral BP 
measurements [22]. This discrepancy could translate to different effects both on 
target-organ damage and future hard endpoints. In the Conduit Artery Function 
Evaluation (CAFÉ) Study, a substudy of the Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes 
Trial (ASCOT), a higher treatment-related decrease of central pulse pressure (such 
a decrease was not evident in brachial pressure measurements) was independently 
associated with clinical benefit and reduced cardiovascular events [23]. Specifically, 
central systolic pressure was some 4.3  mmHg lower, and aortic pulse pressure 
3.0 mmHg lower in those randomized to the amlodipine–perindopril regimen. Other 
studies have also shown that endpoints related to organ damage can be predicted by 
indices of central hemodynamics after therapy. The pREterax in regression of 
Arterial Stiffness in a contrOlled double-bliNd (REASON) study that compared 
atenolol against a perindopril–indapamide combination showed that normalization 
of brachial systolic BP is achieved with a significantly greater reduction of carotid 
Fig. 9.3 The effects of antihypertensive treatment of wave reflections and aortic stiffness9 Central Blood Pressure and Prehypertension132
systolic BP after a 12-month treatment with the combination [24]. In this study, 
compared with atenolol, the perindopril–indapamide combination was associated 
with a greater fall in left ventricular mass, and this was related to carotid but not 
brachial blood pressure [25]. Furthermore, the reduction in carotid wall diameter 
and hypertrophy with antihypertensive treatment is related to carotid pulse pressure 
but not to mean blood pressure [26]. On the contrary, nebivolol, a beta-blocker with 
vasodilatory action, apparently reduced central BP compared to placebo in a recent 
small, randomized, controlled trial with prehypertensive patients [27]. Furthermore, 
in a randomized study an amlodipine–valsartan combination decreased central (sys-
tolic and pulse) pressure and augmentation index more than an amlodipine–atenolol 
combination, irrespectively of changes in peripheral BP and heart rate [28].
There is a great need to prove the clinical value of central pressures by assigning 
them as the guiding factor of treatment and testing whether this strategy provides 
superior results compared to peripheral BP-guided therapy [ 11]. In this direction, 
in two recent small studies where central BP in hypertensives [ 29] and augmenta-
tion index in heart failure [ 30] were used as therapeutic targets there were modest 
but clinically apparent benefits for the patients. Specifically, in the first case mea-
surement of central pressures led to decrease in the number of antihypertensive 
medications used, as well as to a marginal improvement in reduction of left ven-
tricular mass; in the second case there was a slight improvement in exercise 
capacity.
9.3  Prehypertension and Central Pressures
While it has become apparent that prehypertension deserves specific attention, the 
extrapolation of similar cutoffs to central pressures is neither practical nor docu-
mented at this stage. This relates mainly to the variable correspondence between 
values of peripheral and brachial pressures and to the nonsolid substantiation of the 
predictive role of central pressures in prehypertensive subjects. More specifically, 
due to the inherent variability of predictors of pulse pressure amplification, a single 
model cannot accurately predict this amplification by measurements of pressure in 
the brachial level. This was elucidated in a large cohort [31] that demonstrated a 
significant, and highly variable, difference between central and brachial systolic 
pressure at all ages, as well as a substantial overlap in aortic systolic pressure 
between different groups of blood pressure. More than 70% of individuals in the 
“high-normal” brachial systolic pressure had similar central pressures to those with 
stage 1 hypertension, despite no overlap in brachial pressures (Fig.  9.1). Moreover, 
approximately 30% of males, and 10% of females, with “normal” brachial BP had 
similar central pressures to those categorized as having stage 1 hypertension. 
However, an important clinical assistance was provided by the recent publication of 
reference values for central BP that will shed more light in the management of 
hypertension and the stratification of risk [32].
Regarding the second prerequisite, i.e., the predictive role of central blood pres-
sures in prehypertension, this is difficult to substantiate. It should be noted that there 
C. Vlachopoulos et al.133
are small cross-sectional studies suggesting an early detrimental role of prehyper -
tension on central pressures and markers of arterial function and structure [33–36], 
as well on other surrogate markers of CVD, such as coronary artery calcification 
[37]. However, regarding the predictive ability of central pressures in terms of clini-
cal endpoints, there are no such dedicated prospective studies. Nevertheless, such a 
possible prognostic ability could be extrapolated by relevant studies on the general 
population and also by the close association of central BPs with other vascular bio-
markers that have been shown to be predictive in prehypertensives [11]. Furthermore, 
scarce data imply an incremental role of central BP over and beyond peripheral BP 
for the detection of target-organ damage that is stronger in patients with prehyper -
tension [38, 39].
Research on the importance of central pressures in the context of hyperten-
sion should be encouraged. The notion that BP targets should be individualized 
based on assessment of cardiovascular risk [ 6] has gained significant ground. 
Central BPs could theoretically be an appealing such tool for individualization 
of treatment [ 29, 40].
 Conclusions
Assessment of central blood pressures makes its way from the research field to 
the clinical field. There are still answers that remain to be answered concerning 
the incremental predictive ability of central blood pressures over peripheral 
blood pressures, as well as the possible role of the central BP-guided therapy in 
everyday practice. Prehypertensive subjects lack guidance from randomized 
studies and their management is based on data from hypertensive patients or 
from the general population. Therefore, prehypertension could be a breeding 
ground for central pressures in order to improve our understanding, as well as the 
management of this population. Although the predictive ability of central pres-
sures for clinical endpoints in the context of hypertension is not currently sub-
stantiated, medium-sized studies have shown a small advantage of central 
pressures compared to peripheral blood pressures at least as far as intermediate 
endpoints are concerned. Further advancements in central blood pressure tech-
nology and acquisition will lead to more widespread use of the new standardized 
devices for assessment of central blood pressures that will result in lower cost 
and higher availability. The idea of central pressures at one day replacing periph-
eral pressures may sound rude and absurd but is not impossible if certain demands 
are met. As Albert Einstein once said “If at first the idea is not absurd, then there 
is no hope for it.”
References
 1. O’Brien E, Fitzgerald D.  The history of blood pressure measurement. J Hum Hypertens. 
1994;8:73–84.
 2. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, et  al. JAMA. 
2003;289:2560–72.9 Central Blood Pressure and Prehypertension134
 3. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redon J, Zanchetti A, Böhm M, et al. 2013 ESH/ESC 
guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension: the Task Force for the Management 
of Arterial Hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2013;34:2159–219. https://doi.org/10.1093/
eurheartj/eht151.
 4. Egan BM, Stevens-Fabry S. Prehypertension—prevalence, health risks, and management strat-
egies. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015;12:289–300. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrcardio.2015.
 5. Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd-Jones DM, Adams RJ, Berry JD, Brown TM, et  al. Heart dis-
ease and stroke statistics—2011 update: a report from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. 2011;123:e18–e209. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0b013e3182009701. Erratum 
in: Circulation. 2011;124:e426. Circulation 2011;123:e240
 6. SPRINT Research Group, Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, Whelton PK, Snyder JK, Sink KM, 
et al. A randomized trial of intensive versus standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med. 
2015;373:2103–16.
 7. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, Casey DE Jr, Collins KJ, Dennison Himmelfarb C, 
et  al. ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guideline 
for the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in 
Adults: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jacc.2017.11.006.
 8. Picone DS, Schultz MG, Otahal P, Aakhus S, Al-Jumaily AM, Black JA, et al. Accuracy of 
cuff-measured blood pressure: systematic reviews and meta-analyses. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2017;70:572–86.
 9. O’Rourke MF. Central aortic pressure: alive and well at 25 years. J Hypertens. 2015;33:187–8.
 10. Vlachopoulos C, Aznaouridis K, O’Rourke MF, Safar ME, Baou K, Stefanadis C. Prediction 
of cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality with central haemodynamics: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:1865–71.
 11. Vlachopoulos C, Xaplanteris P, Aboyans V , Brodmann M, Cífková R, Cosentino F, et al. The 
role of vascular biomarkers for primary and secondary prevention. A position paper from 
the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on peripheral circulation: endorsed by 
the Association for Research into Arterial Structure and Physiology (ARTERY) Society. 
Atherosclerosis. 2015;241:507–32.
 12. Vlachopoulos C, O’Rourke M. Genesis of the normal and abnormal arterial pulse. Curr Probl 
Cardiol. 2000;25:303–67.
 13. Nichols WW, O’Rourke MF, Vlachopoulos C. McDonald’s blood flow in arteries: theoretic, 
experimental, and clinical principles. 6th ed. London: CRC Press; 2011.
 14. McEniery CM, Cockcroft JR, Roman MJ, Franklin SS, Wilkinson IB. Central blood pressure: 
current evidence and clinical importance. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:1719–25.
 15. Sharman JE, Avolio AP, Baulmann J, Benetos A, Blacher J, Blizzard CL, et al. Validation of 
non-invasive central blood pressure devices: ARTERY Society task force consensus statement 
on protocol standardization. Eur Heart J. 2017a;38:2805–12. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/
ehw632.
 16. McEniery CM.  Central blood pressure and cardiovascular risk: an individual participant 
meta-analysis of prospective observational data from 22,433 subjects. JACC. 2015;65(Suppl 
10):A1464.
 17. Roman MJ, Ganau A, Saba PS, Pini R, Pickering T, Deveraux R. Impact of arterial stiffening 
on left ventricular structure. Hypertension. 2000;36:489–94.
 18. Roman MJ, Devereux RB, Kizer JR, Lee ET, Galloway JM, Ali T, et al. Central pressure more 
strongly relates to vascular disease and outcome than does brachial pressure: the Strong Heart 
Study. Hypertension. 2007;50:197–203.
 19. Kollias A, Lagou S, Zeniodi ME, Boubouchairopoulou N, Stergiou GS. Association of central 
versus brachial blood pressure with target-organ damage: systematic review and meta-analy-
sis. Hypertension. 2016;67:183–90.
C. Vlachopoulos et al.135
 20. Roman MJ, Devereux RB. Association of central and peripheral blood pressures with interme-
diate cardiovascular phenotypes. Hypertension. 2014;63:1148–53.
 21. Agabiti-Rosei E, Mancia G, O’Rourke MF, Roman MJ, Safar ME, Smulyan H, et  al. 
Central blood pressure measurements and antihypertensive therapy: a consensus document. 
Hypertension. 2007;50:154–60.
 22. Pucci G, Ranalli MG, Battista F, Schillaci G. Effects of β-blockers with and without vasodilat-
ing properties on central blood pressure: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
trials in hypertension. Hypertension. 2016;67:316–24.
 23. Williams B, Lacy PS, Thom SM, Cruickshank K, Stanton A, Collier D, et  al. Differential 
impact of blood pressure-lowering drugs on central aortic pressure and clinical outcomes: 
principal results of the Conduit Artery Function Evaluation (CAFE) study. Circulation. 
2006;113:1213–25.
 24. London GM, Asmar RG, O’Rourke MF, Safar ME, on behalf of the REASON Project 
Investigators. Mechanism(s) of selective systolic blood pressure reduction after a low-dose 
combination of perindopril/indapamide in hypertensive subjects: comparison with atenolol. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43:92–9.
 25. de Luca N, Asmar RG, London GM, O’Rourke MF, Safar ME, REASON Project Investigators. 
Selective reduction of cardiac mass and central blood pressure on low-dose combination perin-
dopril/indapamide in hypertensive subjects. J Hypertens. 2004;22:1623–30.
 26. Boutouyrie P, Bussy C, Hayoz D, Hengstler J, Dartois N, Laloux B, et al. Local pulse pres-
sure and regression of arterial wall hypertrophy during long-term antihypertensive treatment. 
Circulation. 2000;101:2601–6.
 27. Davis JT, Pasha DN, Khandrika S, Fung MM, Milic M, O’Connor DT.  Central hemody-
namics in prehypertension: effect of the β-adrenergic antagonist nebivolol. J Clin Hypertens 
(Greenwich). 2013;15:69–74.
 28. Boutouyrie P, Achouba A, Trunet P, Laurent S, EXPLOR Trialist Group. Amlodipine-valsartan 
combination decreases central systolic blood pressure more effectively than the amlodipine-
atenolol combination: the EXPLOR study. Hypertension. 2010;55:1314–22.
 29. Sharman JE, Marwick TH, Gilroy D, Otahal P, Abhayaratna WP, Stowasser M.  Value of 
Central Blood Pressure for GUIDing ManagEment of Hypertension Study Investigators 
Randomized trial of guiding hypertension management using central aortic blood pressure 
compared with best-practice care: principal findings of the BP GUIDE study. Hypertension. 
2013;62:1138–45.
 30. Borlaug BA, Olson TP, Abdelmoneim Mohamed S, Melenovsky V , Sorrell VL, Noonan K, 
et al. A randomized pilot study of aortic waveform guided therapy in chronic heart failure. J 
Am Heart Assoc. 2014;3:e000745.
 31. McEniery CM, Yasmin MDB, Munnery M, Wallace SM, Rowe CV , et al. Central pressure: 
variability and impact of cardiovascular risk factors: the Anglo-Cardiff Collaborative Trial 
II. Hypertension. 2008;51:1476–82.
 32. Herbert A, Cruickshank JK, Laurent S, Boutouyrie P, Reference Values for Arterial 
Measurements Collaboration. Establishing reference values for central blood pressure and its 
amplification in a general healthy population and according to cardiovascular risk factors. Eur 
Heart J. 2014;35:3122–33.
 33. Drukteinis JS, Roman MJ, Fabsitz RR, Lee ET, Best LG, Russell M, et al. Cardiac and sys-
temic hemodynamic characteristics of hypertension and prehypertension in adolescents and 
young adults: the Strong Heart Study. Circulation. 2007;115:221–7.
 34. Gedikli O, Kiris A, Ozturk S, Baltaci D, Karaman K, Durmus I, et al. Effects of prehyperten-
sion on arterial stiffness and wave reflections. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2010;32:84–9.
 35. Tomiyama H, Yamashina A. Arterial stiffness in prehypertension: a possible vicious cycle. J 
Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2012;5:280–6.
 36. Urbina EM, Khoury PR, McCoy C, Daniels SR, Kimball TR, Dolan LM.  Cardiac and 
vascular consequences of pre-hypertension in youth. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 
2011;13:332–42.9 Central Blood Pressure and Prehypertension136
 37. Lehmann N, Erbel R, Mahabadi AA, Kälsch H, Möhlenkamp S, Moebus S, et al. Accelerated 
progression of coronary artery calcification in hypertension but also prehypertension. J 
Hypertens. 2016;34:2233–42.
 38. Booysen HL, Norton GR, Maseko MJ, Libhaber CD, Majane OH, Sareli P, et al. Aortic, but 
not brachial blood pressure category enhances the ability to identify target organ changes in 
normotensives. J Hypertens. 2013;31:1124–30.
 39. Hodson B, Norton GR, Ballim I, Libhaber CD, Sareli P, Woodiwiss AJ. Impact of aortic rather 
than brachial pulsatile haemodynamics on variations in end-organ measures across the full 
adult blood pressure range. J Hypertens. 2017;35(12):2443–53.
 40. Sharman JE, Stanton T, Reid CM, Keech A, Roberts-Thomson P, Stewart S, et al. Targeted 
LOWering of central blood pressure in patients with hypertension: baseline recruitment, ratio-
nale and design of a randomized controlled trial (The LOW CBP study). Contemp Clin Trials. 
2017b;62:37–42.
C. Vlachopoulos et al.137 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_10
T. Weber ( *) 
Cardiology Department, Klinikum Wels-Grieskirchen, Wels, Austria
e-mail: thomas.weber3@liwest.at 
S. Wassertheurer · B. Hametner · B. Kupka 
Department of Health and Environment, Austrian Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria 
K. Mortensen 
University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany10Diurnal and Pulsatile Hemodynamics 
in Individuals with Prehypertension
Thomas Weber, Siegfried Wassertheurer, 
Bernhard Hametner, Brigitte Kupka, and Kai Mortensen
10.1  Introduction: The Concept of Prehypertension and Out-
of-Office Blood Pressure
Prehypertension as a blood pressure (BP) category was introduced in the 7th US 
Joint National Committee (JNC 7) report on prevention, detection, evaluation, and 
treatment of high blood pressure [1 ]. The decision was based on the continuous 
relationship between BP levels and the risk of cardiovascular events, which starts 
well below 140/90 mmHg (the usual definition of hypertension). In particular, the 
incidence of cardiovascular events in individuals with BP levels in the prehyper -
tensive range (120–139/80–89  mmHg) is in between those with optimal BP 
(<120/80 mmHg) and those with hypertension (>140/90 mmHg) [2 ]. This catego-
rization is undoubtedly true for population-based studies, and may be useful for 
early detection of individuals at risk for developing hypertension in order to pro-
mote lifestyle changes to reduce this risk. However, a closer look at the JNC 7 
report reveals that the BP classification proposed was based on office BP mea-
surements only. It is well known that out-of-office BP monitoring (24 h ambula-
tory BP monitoring—ABPM and home BP monitoring—HBPM) provides a more 
reliable assessment of an individual’s BP level, as compared to office BP [3 ]. For 
instance, BP measured at the doctor’s office may be higher than out-of-office BP 
(white-coat effect), which may lead to different BP classifications for office and 138
out-of-office measurements in one single individual (“white-coat hypertension”). 
On the other hand, office BP may be also lower than out-of-office BP, which could 
also lead to problems with classification in single individuals. This effect is called 
“masked hypertension,” if office BP is normal and out-of-office BP is elevated. 
The percentage of individuals with masked hypertension is low with office-based 
optimal BP, but can be substantial in individuals with office-based prehyperten-
sion [4 ]. As cardiovascular risk is related more closely to out-of-office BP, as 
compared to office BP [3 ], a closer look at diurnal BP profiles (i.e., out-of-office 
BP) in office-based prehypertension is warranted. In a recent study, 83.8% of 
participants with masked hypertension had prehypertension, and 34.1% of partici-
pants with prehypertension had masked hypertension, suggesting substantial 
overlap between both categories [5 ].
10.2  Pulsatile Hemodynamics: Basic Principles
Due to the nature of the pump in the human circulation (the heart), pressure and flow 
is pulsatile, rather than continuous, in large and small arteries. Up to the last decade 
of the twentieth century, the focus in blood pressure research and treatment was 
mean and diastolic BP, and hemodynamics of the circulation were described as 
“cardiac output = mean BP/peripheral resistance.” This simplistic approach is valid 
only for steady-state conditions, and fails to take the mechanical properties of the 
arteries (“arterial stiffness”) into account. To characterize pulsatile phenomena, 
other measures are needed. The simplest one is pulse pressure (PP), the difference 
between systolic and diastolic BP. PP is a convenient but crude measurement of 
pulsatile hemodynamics. PP increases with age and with stiffening of the aorta and 
the large arteries. PP is more closely related to cardiovascular risk in middle-aged 
and elderly individuals than other blood pressure components [6], and can be used 
to identify patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction [7]. Brachial 
pulse pressure  >  60  mmHg is a hallmark of asymptomatic organ damage in the 
elderly, according to the 2013 European Society of Hypertension (ESH)/European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines for the management of arterial hyperten-
sion [3]. PP, assessed at the brachial artery, has several limitations: it depends not 
only on arterial (PP increases with increased arterial stiffness) but also on cardiac 
function (PP decreases with severely impaired systolic function), which leads to an 
inverse relationship with outcomes in patients with severely impaired systolic func-
tion [8]; PP measured at the brachial artery does not exactly match PP assessed at 
the ascending aorta (central PP), with brachial PP being higher (“amplified”) than 
aortic PP. The difference or ratio (“pulse pressure amplification—PPA”) [9] between 
central and brachial PP depends among other factors on aortic stiffness, cardiac 
function, heart rate, and arterial geometry.
In general, measurements of pulsatile hemodynamics can be divided into cen-
tral (aortic) pressures (central systolic BP—cSBP, central PP—cPP), estimates of 
wave reflections, and measures of arterial stiffness. CSBP and cPP are lower than 
their brachial counterparts, whereas mean BP and diastolic BP decrease by only 
T. Weber et al.139
1–2 mmHg from the aorta to peripheral arteries. CSBP and cPP are the pressures 
relevant to vital organs like the heart, brain, and kidney, and have been closer 
associated with cardiovascular outcomes in some, but not all, studies [10]. 
Pressure and flow waves are generated with each heartbeat and are propagated 
towards the periphery where they are reflected backwards (towards the heart) for 
various reasons (stiffness gradient, presence of bifurcations, abrupt diameter gra-
dient in arterioles). On their return, the reflected waves merge with the antegrade 
wave and amplify it [11]. With aging, the arrival of reflected waves in the ascend-
ing aorta is shifted into systole due to earlier wave return. With vasoconstriction, 
the amplitude of the reflected pressure waves increases. As a net result of both 
these processes, cardiac load and oxygen consumption is increased, resulting in 
an imbalance towards myocardial ischemia and an impairment of (mainly dia-
stolic) left ventricular function [11]. Wave reflection can be quantified from pres-
sure waveforms (Pulse Waveform Analysis—PWA), or from simultaneous 
analysis of pressure and flow waves (Wave Separation Analysis—WSA)—Fig. 
10.1. With PWA, an inflection point is identified mathematically on the pressure 
waveform, which is thought to represent the beginning of the arrival of reflected 
waves at the ascending aorta. The pressure rise from the inflection point to the 
systolic peak of the pressure curve is called “Pressure Augmentation—AP,” and 
the ratio AP/cPP is called “Augmentation Index—AIx”). Using WSA, the ampli-
tudes of the forward wave ( Pf; the pressure wave generated by the heart) and the 
Aortic Pressure
Aortic FlowFlow  (AU)PIAP
PP
0 0.2
ED0.40 .6 0.81Transfer function
Manual digitizatoin
& alignmentWave Separation105
100
95
90
85
80
75
Time (s)
Time (s)100105
100P
Pr
Pb
PbPr95
90
85
80
7500 .2 0.4
Time (s)0.60 .8 180
60
40
20
0
0 0.2ED
0.40 .6 0.81Pressure (mmHg)
Pressure (mmHg)120
110Radial Pressure
100
90
80
70
0 0.2 0.4
Time (s)
Doppler UltrasoundPressure (mmHg)
0.6 0.8 1
Fig. 10.1 Quantification of wave reflections. Upper panel: A peripheral pressure waveform (here: 
radial waveform) is obtained. Using a generalized transfer function, the corresponding central 
pressure waveform is calculated. Pulse waveform analysis (PWA) provides the inflection point; the 
part of the curve following the inflection point is ascribed to the effects of wave reflection on cen-
tral pressure and quantified as AP = Augmented Pressure; the ratio AP/PP is called Augmentation 
Index = AIx); Lower panel: Doppler flow curves are obtained at the left ventricular outflow tract 
(using the ARCSolver algorithms, they also can be estimated from pressure waves); they are digi-
tized and aligned with the pressure curves; Right figure: Wave Separation Analysis (WSA) using 
simultaneous analysis of pressure and flow curves yields the amplitudes of the forward (Pf) and the 
backward (= reflected; Pb) pressure waves. Reproduced with slight modifications with permission 
of IOP Publishing from Parragh et al., Non-invasive wave reflection quantification in patients with 
reduced ejection fraction. Physiol Meas 2015;36:179–9010 Diurnal and Pulsatile Hemodynamics in Individuals with Prehypertension140
backward wave ( Pb; the reflected wave) can be calculated, as well as their ratio 
(Reflection Magnitude RM; Pb/Pf). Arterial stiffness (particularly aortic stiff-
ness) can be measured in vivo, because the speed of propagation of pulse (pres-
sure or flow or distension) waves in an artery is directly related to the mechanical 
properties of the vessel (the stiffer the vessel, the higher the velocity). Therefore, 
one has to measure the time delay between the arrival of a pulse wave at two loca-
tions (commonly the carotid artery and the femoral artery), and distance between 
both locations, to calculate the pulse wave velocity (PWV) as the most robust 
measure of arterial stiffness. As the effects of the aging process (i.e., loss of elas-
ticity, increased stiffening) are most pronounced in the human aorta as opposed to 
the muscular arteries [12], the aortic pathway should be included in the measure-
ment. In addition, the prognostic value is largely limited to pathways including 
the aorta [13], such as carotid-femoral PWV . Carotid-femoral PWV is a strong 
independent predictor of cardiovascular events in different groups of high- and 
low-risk patients and in the general population [14].
10.3  Pulsatile Hemodynamics: Measurement 
in the Ambulatory Setting
Traditionally, central BP and wave reflections have been estimated, using bra-
chial or radial tonometry to acquire waveforms, which were calibrated with 
brachial SBP and DBP, further processed with dedicated algorithms (transfer 
functions) to derive central BP waveforms, and PWA to derive AIx and AP [10]. 
These techniques have been successfully used in clinical trials. Their value for 
ambulatory recordings, however, is limited. Therefore, alternatives have been 
developed, which rely on acquisition of waveforms with a brachial cuff [15, 16] 
or with a wrist-watch-like tonometer [17]. The device we used in our study 
(Mobil-O-Graph, I.E.M., Stolberg, Germany) as well as the algorithms used for 
further processing the brachial waveforms (ARCSolver algorithms [18], AIT 
Austrian Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria) have been extensively vali-
dated for brachial ABPM [19– 21], cSBP [15, 22], and wave reflections [22– 24]. 
In addition, the device with the inbuilt ARCSolver algorithms gives an estimate 
of aortic PWV , based on an algorithm which incorporates age, SBP, and wave-
form characteristics. This algorithm has been validated against the gold stan-
dard (invasive aortic PWV) in more than 900 patients [25], and against magnetic 
resonance imaging-based aortic PWV [26]. In office-based recordings, 
ARCSolver-based estimates of central pressures, wave reflections, and aortic 
PWV are associated with hypertensive organ damage [7 , 24] and clinical end-
points such as all-cause mortality [27, 28] above and beyond brachial BP. Using 
ABPM-based estimates of pulsatile hemodynamics, 24 h cSBP has a closer rela-
tionship with left ventricular mass and left ventricular hypertrophy [29, 30] and 
to diastolic function [31], as compared to 24 h brachial SBP. In patients with 
end-stage renal disease undergoing hemodialysis, ambulatory 48 h-based aortic 
PWV was an independent predictor of cardiovascular events and all-cause mor -
tality [32].
T. Weber et al.141
10.4  Aim of Our Study and Characteristics  
of Study Participants
For the purpose of the recent analysis, we selected individuals free from antihyper -
tensive treatment out of several ongoing studies on 24 h pulsatile hemodynamics. 
The studies have been approved by regional Ethics committees (D-20-13, EC of 
Upper Austria, Austria; 1991/2013; EC of Medical University Vienna, Austria). Our 
aim was twofold: first, to characterize out-of-office BP, based on ABPM, in patients 
with prehypertension, and to identify patients with masked hypertension among 
those classified as prehypertensive; and second, to describe 24 h pulsatile hemody-
namics in patients with prehypertension and to compare them with normotensives 
and hypertensives.
10.5  Results: Classification According to 24 h ABPM
Overall, we included 433 individuals (228 men, 205 women). Mean age was 
50.6 years (SD 15.8), mean body mass index 26.0 kg/m2 (SD 4.6).
Based on the JNC 7 classification and office BP, 38 individuals (8.8%) were clas-
sified as having optimal BP, 137 (31.6%) as prehypertensives, and 258 (59.6%) as 
hypertensives (Table  10.1). Age increased from optimal BP (45.7 years, SD 17.2) to 
prehypertension (49.2 years, SD 17.3) and hypertension (52.2 years, SD 14.5).
When brachial ABPM was taken into account, using a cutoff of 24 h ABPM of 
130 mmHg systolic and 80 mmHg diastolic, classification changed substantially—
Fig. 10.2: among the 38 individuals with optimal BP, 4 had elevated ABPM values, 
and accordingly were classified as masked hypertension. Thirty-four individuals 
with optimal BP had ABPM values in the normal range. Among the 137 participants 
with prehypertension, 28 (20.4%) had elevated ABPM values, and accordingly were 
classified as having masked hypertension. One hundred and nine prehypertensives 
(79.6%) had ABPM values in the normal range. Among the 258 hypertensives, 79 
(30.6%) had normal ABPM values, and accordingly were classified as white-coat 
hypertensives. One hundred and seventy-nine office-based hypertensives (69.4%) 
had also ABPM values in the hypertensive range.
Table 10.1 Classification of study participants
BP classification n Office BP (mmHg) 24 h ABPM (mmHg)
Classification based on office BP
Optimal BP 38 110/71 115/71
Prehypertension 137 126/81 119/75
Hypertension 258 148/96 131/84
Classification based on office BP and ABPM
True optimal BP 34 109/71 113/70
True prehypertension 109 125/80 116/72
Masked hypertension 32 127/82 132/84
White-coat hypertension 79 143/91 120/74
Sustained hypertension 179 151/99 136/88
BP blood pressure, ABPM ambulatory blood pressure monitoring10 Diurnal and Pulsatile Hemodynamics in Individuals with Prehypertension142
10.6  Results: Pulsatile Hemodynamics  
in Office-Based BP Categories
24 h pulsatile hemodynamics, according to office-based BP categories, are shown in 
Table  10.2. Results for 24 h central pressures in individuals with prehypertension 
were in between individuals with optimal BP and with hypertension—Fig. 10.3. 
Roughly the same was true for estimates of 24 h wave reflections, although differ -
ences were small and failed to reach statistical significance. 24 h PWV was lowest 
in individuals with optimal BP, intermediate in prehypertensives, and highest in 
hypertensives (p < 0.01).
10.7  Results: Pulsatile Hemodynamics in Office-  
and ABPM-Based BP Categories
24 h pulsatile hemodynamics, according to office- and ABPM-based BP categories, 
are shown in Table  10.3. Individuals with masked hypertension have significantly 
higher values for 24  h brachial pressures, 24  h central pressures, 24  h wave Office based normotension
true nor motension mask ed hypertension
89.5%10.5%
79.6%30.6%
69.4%20.4%Office based prehypertension Office based hypertension
true preh ypertension mask ed hy pertension sustained hy pertension white coat hy pertension
Fig. 10.2 Percentage of individuals with a change of blood pressure category after ambulatory 
blood pressure monitoring
Table 10.2 24 h pulsatile hemodynamics, according to office-based BP categories
Optimal BP 
(n = 38)Prehypertension 
(n = 137)Hypertension 
(n = 258)
p-value Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD
24 h bSBP (mmHg) 114.8 9.0 119.4 9.9 131.0 12.1 <0.01
24 h MAP (mmHg) 91.0 6.8 95.2 7.9 105.4 9.9 <0.01
24 h bDBP (mmHg) 70.9 6.2 74.6 7.3 83.8 9.6 <0.01
24 h bPP (mmHg) 43.9 6.7 44.8 6.8 47.2 8.6 0.01
24 h HR (bpm) 73.1 8.2 71.3 8.8 74.5 8.1 <0.01
24 h cSBP (mmHg) 117.0 9.8 122.3 11.5 132.1 12.2 <0.01
24 h cPP (mmHg) 44.9 7.6 46.5 9.1 47.0 9.8 0.44
24 h AIx75 (%) 23.2 8.5 22.6 8.8 24.0 8.6 0.29
24 h AP (mmHg) 11.7 5.4 12.3 5.9 12.4 6.0 0.86
24 h AIx (%) 24.3 8.4 24.7 8.9 24.4 8.6 0.96
24 h RM (%) 62.9 6.8 64.0 6.6 63.8 5.7 0.64
24 h Pb (mmHg) 18.2 3.6 19.0 4.2 19.1 4.3 0.46
24 h pf (mmHg) 28.5 4.5 29.4 5.7 29.6 6.1 0.65
24 h aPWV (m/s) 7.3 2.0 7.9 2.0 8.4 1.8 <0.01
T. Weber et al.143
140
135
130
125
120
115
110
105
1000123456789
time of da y (hours)bSBP (mmHg)
101112131415161718Optimal
Prehypertension
Hyper tension
192021222324140
135
130
125
120
115
110
105
100012345678 9
time of da y (hours)cSBP (mmHg)
101112131415161718Optimal
Prehypertension
Hyper tension
192021222324
Fig. 10.3 24 h profiles of brachial and central systolic blood pressure, according to office blood 
pressure-based categories
Table 10.3 24 h pulsatile hemodynamics, according to office- and ABPM-based BP categories
True 
optimal BP 
(n = 34)Masked 
hypertension 
(n = 32)True 
prehypertension 
(n = 109)White-coat 
hypertension 
(n = 79)Sustained 
hypertension 
(n = 179)
p-value Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD
24 h bSBP 
(mmHg)113.1 7.5 131.8 7.3 116.2 7.5 120.4 6.6 135.7 11.0 <0.01
24 h MAP 
(mmHg)89.6 5.5 105.8 4.3 92.3 5.8 95.3 4.7 109.9 8.1 <0.01
24 h bDBP 
(mmHg)69.6 5.0 83.9 5.0 72.2 5.5 74.0 5.2 88.1 7.7 <0.01
24 h bPP 
(mmHg)43.5 6.1 48.0 8.8 44.0 6.0 46.3 7.1 47.5 9.2 <0.01
24 h HR 
(bpm)72.9 8.6 70.1 7.7 71.8 8.9 73.4 7.3 75.0 8.4 <0.01
24 h cSBP 
(mmHg)115.4 8.7 135.3 10.3 118.9 8.8 122.5 7.3 136.4 11.5 <0.01
24 h cPP 
(mmHg)44.7 7.3 50.0 12.0 45.5 7.9 47.3 8.7 46.9 10.3 0.26
24 h AIx75 
(%)22.9 8.7 22.6 9.4 22.8 8.5 23.7 8.6 24.2 8.6 0.63
24 h AP 
(mmHg)11.6 5.5 13.7 7.2 11.9 5.4 12.5 6.2 12.3 6.0 0.69
24 h AIx (%) 24.0 8.7 25.4 8.8 24.5 8.8 24.6 9.2 24.4 8.4 0.97
24 h RM 62.8 7.0 64.4 5.8 63.8 6.8 65.0 5.9 63.3 5.6 0.23
24 h Pb 
(mmHg)18.1 3.5 20.5 5.5 18.5 3.7 19.4 4.0 18.9 4.5 0.18
24 h pf 
(mmHg)28.4 4.2 31.4 7.2 28.8 5.0 29.7 5.3 29.6 6.4 0.28
24 h PWV 
(m/s)7.2 1.9 8.9 2.2 7.6 1.8 8.5 2.3 8.4 1.5 <0.01
P-values for comparison across all groups are from ANOV A. Individuals with masked hyperten-
sion have significantly higher values for brachial pressures, central pressures, and PWV , as com-
pared to individuals with true prehypertension (all p < 0.05, t-test or Welch test). For abbreviations 
see Table 10.210 Diurnal and Pulsatile Hemodynamics in Individuals with Prehypertension144
reflections, and 24 h PWV , as compared to individuals with true prehypertension. 
Interestingly, individuals with sustained hypertension have significantly higher val-
ues for 24 h bSBP, DBP, and MAP, as well as for 24 h cSBP, but not for most mea-
sures of wave reflection and PWV . Individuals with masked hypertension had the 
highest values for 24 h bPP, 24 h cPP, 24 h wave reflections (AP, AIx, Pb), and 24 h 
aortic stiffness (PWV)—Fig. 10.4.
10.8  Discussion and Conclusions
Our data clearly show the shortcomings of conventional BP classifications, which 
are based only on office BP [1 ]. The prognosis of individuals and patient groups 
can be easily misclassified, if only office BP is taken into account. In our dataset, 
10% of individuals classified as having optimal BP and 20 percent of individuals 
classified as prehypertensive (both based on office BP), turned out to have actu-
ally masked hypertension, a condition with clearly worse prognosis, as compared 
to true optimal BP [3 ]. 24 h pulsatile hemodynamics show higher central BP, an 
increase in wave reflections, and a stiffer aorta (a higher aortic PWV) in the sub-
groups of individuals with office-based optimal BP or prehypertension, who were 
finally diagnosed with masked hypertension, as compared to those with true True optimal BP9.5
9
8.5
8
7.5PWV (m/s)
7
6.50123456789 10
time of day (hours)1112131415161718192021222324Masked hypertension
True prehypertension
White coat hypertension 
Sustained hypertension 
Fig. 10.4 24 h profiles of aortic pulse wave velocity according to office and 24 h ambulatory 
blood pressure-based categories
T. Weber et al.145
optimal BP or true prehypertension. All of these measures of pulsatile hemody-
namics have proven diagnostic value above and beyond brachial BP [7 , 10, 13, 24, 
27–32]. Therefore, our findings suggest that office-based prehypertension actu-
ally comprises individuals with high and low cardiovascular risk. Out-of-office 
BP measurements, ideally incorporating pulsatile hemodynamics, are a necessity 
in these individuals.
References
 1. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, Jones DW, 
Materson BJ, Oparil S, Wright JT Jr, Roccella EJ, Joint National Committee on Prevention, 
Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute and National High Blood Pressure Education Program Coordinating 
Committee. Seventh report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, 
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. Hypertension. 2003;42:1206–52.
 2. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, Evans JC, O'Donnell CJ, Kannel WB, Levy D. Impact of high-
normal blood pressure on the risk of cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1291–7.
 3. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redon J, Zanchetti A, Bohm M, Christiaens T, Cifkova 
R, De Backer G, Dominiczak A, Galderisi M, Grobbee DE, Jaarsma T, Kirchhof P, Kjeldsen 
SE, Laurent S, Manolis AJ, Nilsson PM, Ruilope LM, Schmieder RE, Sirnes PA, Sleight P, 
Viigimaa M, Waeber B, Zannad F. 2013 ESH/ESC guidelines for the management of arterial 
hypertension: the Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European 
Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). J Hypertens. 
2013;31:1281–357.
 4. Schwartz JE, Burg MM, Shimbo D, Broderick JE, Stone AA, Ishikawa J, Sloan R, Yurgel T, 
Grossman S, Pickering TG. Clinic blood pressure underestimates ambulatory blood pressure 
in an untreated employer-based US population: results from the masked hypertension study. 
Circulation. 2016;134:1794–807.
 5. Shimbo D, Newman JD, Schwartz JE. Masked hypertension and prehypertension: diagnostic 
overlap and interrelationships with left ventricular mass: the Masked Hypertension Study. Am 
J Hypertens. 2012;25:664–71.
 6. Franklin SS, Larson MG, Khan SA, Wong ND, Leip EP, Kannel WB, Levy D. Does the rela-
tion of blood pressure to coronary heart disease risk change with aging? The Framingham 
Heart Study. Circulation. 2001;103(9):1245.
 7. Weber T, Wassertheurer S, O’Rourke MF, Haiden A, Zweiker R, Rammer M, Hametner B, 
Eber B. Pulsatile hemodynamics in patients with exertional dyspnea: potentially of value in 
the diagnostic evaluation of suspected heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2013;61:1874–83.
 8. Regnault V , Lagrange J, Pizard A, Safar ME, Fay R, Pitt B, Challande P, Rossignol P, Zannad 
F, Lacolley P. Opposite predictive value of pulse pressure and aortic pulse wave velocity on 
heart failure with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction: insights from an Eplerenone Post-
Acute Myocardial Infarction Heart Failure Efficacy and Survival Study (EPHESUS) substudy. 
Hypertension. 2014;63:105–11.
 9. Avolio AP, Van Bortel LM, Boutouyrie P, Cockcroft JR, McEniery CM, Protogerou AD, 
Roman MJ, Safar ME, Segers P, Smulyan H. Role of pulse pressure amplification in arterial 
hypertension: experts’ opinion and review of the data. Hypertension. 2009;54:375–83.
 10. McEniery CM, Cockcroft JR, Roman MJ, Franklin SS, Wilkinson IB. Central blood pressure: 
current evidence and clinical importance. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:1719–25.
 11. Vlachopoulos C, Xaplanteris P, Aboyans V , Brodmann M, Cifkova R, Cosentino F, De Carlo 
M, Gallino A, Landmesser U, Laurent S, Lekakis J, Mikhailidis DP, Naka KK, Protogerou 
AD, Rizzoni D, Schmidt-Trucksass A, Van Bortel L, Weber T, Yamashina A, Zimlichman R, 10 Diurnal and Pulsatile Hemodynamics in Individuals with Prehypertension146
Boutouyrie P, Cockcroft J, O'Rourke M, Park JB, Schillaci G, Sillesen H, Townsend RR. The 
role of vascular biomarkers for primary and secondary prevention. A position paper from 
the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on peripheral circulation: endorsed by 
the Association for Research into Arterial Structure and Physiology (ARTERY) Society. 
Atherosclerosis. 2015;241:507–32.
 12. O’Rourke MF, Hashimoto J. Mechanical factors in arterial aging: a clinical perspective. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:1–13.
 13. Pannier B, Guerin AP, Marchais SJ, Safar ME, London GM.  Stiffness of capacitive and 
conduit arteries: prognostic significance for end-stage renal disease patients. Hypertension. 
2005;45:592–6.
 14. Ben-Shlomo Y , Spears M, Boustred C, May M, Anderson SG, Benjamin EJ, Boutouyrie P, 
Cameron J, Chen CH, Cruickshank JK, Hwang SJ, Lakatta EG, Laurent S, Maldonado J, 
Mitchell GF, Najjar SS, Newman AB, Ohishi M, Pannier B, Pereira T, Vasan RS, Shokawa T, 
Sutton-Tyrell K, Verbeke F, Wang KL, Webb DJ, Willum Hansen T, Zoungas S, McEniery CM, 
Cockcroft JR, Wilkinson IB. Aortic pulse wave velocity improves cardiovascular event predic-
tion: an individual participant meta-analysis of prospective observational data from 17,635 
subjects. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:636–46.
 15. Weber T, Wassertheurer S, Rammer M, Maurer E, Hametner B, Mayer CC, Kropf J, Eber 
B. Validation of a brachial cuff-based method for estimating central systolic blood pressure. 
Hypertension. 2011;58:825–32.
 16. Horvath IG, Nemeth A, Lenkey Z, Alessandri N, Tufano F, Kis P, Gaszner B, Cziraki A. Invasive 
validation of a new oscillometric device (Arteriograph) for measuring augmentation index, 
central blood pressure and aortic pulse wave velocity. J Hypertens. 2010;28:2068–75.
 17. Williams B, Lacy PS, Yan P, Hwee CN, Liang C, Ting CM. Development and validation of a 
novel method to derive central aortic systolic pressure from the radial pressure waveform using 
an n-point moving average method. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:951–61.
 18. Hametner B, Wassertheurer S, Kropf J, Mayer C, Holzinger A, Eber B, Weber T. Wave reflec-
tion quantification based on pressure waveforms alone—methods, comparison, and clinical 
covariates. Comput Methods Prog Biomed. 2013;109:250–9.
 19. Jones CR, Taylor K, Chowienczyk P, Poston L, Shennan AH. A validation of the Mobil O 
Graph (version 12) ambulatory blood pressure monitor. Blood Press Monit. 2000;5:233–8.
 20. Franssen PM, Imholz BP. Evaluation of the Mobil-O-Graph new generation ABPM device 
using the ESH criteria. Blood Press Monit. 2010;15:229–31.
 21. Wei W, Tolle M, Zidek W, van der Giet M. Validation of the mobil-O-Graph: 24 h-blood pres-
sure measurement device. Blood Press Monit. 2010;15:225–8.
 22. Wassertheurer S, Kropf J, Weber T, van der Giet M, Baulmann J, Ammer M, Hametner B, 
Mayer CC, Eber B, Magometschnigg D. A new oscillometric method for pulse wave analysis: 
comparison with a common tonometric method. J Hum Hypertens. 2010;24:498–504.
 23. Hametner B, Parragh S, Mayer C, Weber T, Van Bortel L, De Buyzere M, Segers P, Rietzschel 
E, Wassertheurer S. Assessment of model based (input) impedance, pulse wave velocity, and 
wave reflection in the Asklepios cohort. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0141656.
 24. Weber T, Wassertheurer S, Rammer M, Haiden A, Hametner B, Eber B.  Wave reflections, 
assessed with a novel method for pulse wave separation, are associated with end-organ damage 
and clinical outcomes. Hypertension. 2012;60:534–41.
 25. Weber T, Wassertheurer S, Hametner B, Parragh S, Eber B. Noninvasive methods to assess 
pulse wave velocity: comparison with the invasive gold standard and relationship with organ 
damage. J Hypertens. 2015;33:1023–31.
 26. Feistritzer HJ, Reinstadler SJ, Klug G, Kremser C, Seidner B, Esterhammer R, Schocke MF, 
Franz WM, Metzler B. Comparison of an oscillometric method with cardiac magnetic reso-
nance for the analysis of aortic pulse wave velocity. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0116862.
 27. Baumann M, Wassertheurer S, Suttmann Y , Burkhardt K, Heemann U. Aortic pulse wave veloc-
ity predicts mortality in chronic kidney disease stages 2-4. J Hypertens. 2014;32:899–903.
 28. Wassertheurer S, Baumann M. Assessment of systolic aortic pressure and its association to all 
cause mortality critically depends on waveform calibration. J Hypertens. 2015;33:1884.
T. Weber et al.147
 29. Protogerou AD, Argyris AA, Papaioannou TG, Kollias GE, Konstantonis GD, Nasothimiou 
E, Achimastos A, Blacher J, Safar ME, Sfikakis PP. Left-ventricular hypertrophy is associ-
ated better with 24-h aortic pressure than 24-h brachial pressure in hypertensive patients: the 
SAFAR study. J Hypertens. 2014;32:1805–14.
 30. Weber T, Wassertheurer S, Sala ER, Ablasser C, Jankowski P, Muisan ML, Giannatasio C, 
Mang C, Schmidt-Trucksass A, Wilkinson I, McEniery C. Os 13-09 relationship between 24 
hour ambulatory central blood pressure and left ventricular mass—a prospective multicenter 
study. J Hypertens. 2016;34(Suppl 1). —ISH 2016 Abstract Book: e210–e211
 31. Zhang Y , Kollias G, Argyris AA, Papaioannou TG, Tountas C, Konstantonis GD, Achimastos 
A, Blacher J, Safar ME, Sfikakis PP, Protogerou AD. Association of left ventricular diastolic 
dysfunction with 24-h aortic ambulatory blood pressure: the SAFAR study. J Hum Hypertens. 
2015;29:442–8.
 32. Sarafidis PA, Loutradis C, Karpetas A, Tzanis G, Piperidou A, Koutroumpas G, Raptis V , 
Syrgkanis C, Liakopoulos V , Efstratiadis G, London G, Zoccali C. Ambulatory pulse wave 
velocity is a stronger predictor of cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality than office and 
ambulatory blood pressure in hemodialysis patients. Hypertension. 2017;70:148–57.10 Diurnal and Pulsatile Hemodynamics in Individuals with Prehypertension149 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_11
H. Haller ( *) · A. Bertram · K. Stahl · J. Menne 
Department of Nephrology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany
e-mail: haller.hermann@mh-hannover.de; Bertram.anna@mh-hannover.de;  
stahl.klaus@mh-hannover.de; menne.jan@mh-hannover.de11Early Changes in Renal Vasculature 
in Prehypertension
Hermann Haller, Anna Bertram, Klaus Stahl, 
and Jan Menne
In this chapter the role of the renal vasculature in the pathophysiology of early 
hypertension or prehypertension will be discussed. Renal vasculature is considered 
the renal microcirculation, i.e., renal capillaries. We will mostly concentrate on 
interstitial capillaries and discuss their role in the early changes of the renal intersti-
tium. Figure  11.1 illustrates the underlying mechanisms of this hypothesis. We will 
in brief describe the role of endothelial cells in this regard and then proceed with the 
role of the NO system, reactive oxygen species, and microinflammation for the 
early changes in the renal vasculature. A novel aspect, the importance of the endo-
thelial glycocalyx and its importance for both inflammation and salt sensitivity will 
also be described and integrated in our model.
Prehypertension is considered to be a condition which precedes and is a precur -
sor of hypertension. It is defined by blood pressure with systolic blood pressure 
between 120 and 139 mmHg or a diastolic blood pressure between 80 and 89 mmHg, 
respectively [1]. Prehypertension is a fairly common condition which affects 
roughly 30% of the population in western countries [2, 3]. The concept of a prehy-
pertensive state which slowly develops into “real” hypertension has been further 
supported by intervention trials which have demonstrated that exposure of a prehy-
pertensive population to a blood pressure lowering strategy, i.e., angiotensin- 
receptor blockade prevents and/or postpones the development of hypertension. 
Interestingly, even 2 years after treatment with ACE-inhibitors or sartans has been 
stopped, a preventive effect of active treatment is still to be demonstrated [4, 5].
The importance of RAAS in these studies may indicate that the vascular system 
of the kidney is involved in the pathophysiology of prehypertension. It is important 
to note that prehypertension is associated with a significantly increased 150
cardiovascular risk. An important question is therefore which cardiovascular altera-
tions are associated or may lead to the development of prehypertension and then 
progress into hypertension. It is obvious that the several pathophysiological systems 
which are important in the pathophysiology of hypertension could be involved, 
namely the sympathetic and/or the central nervous system, the heart, the kidney or 
changes in the vasculature. In this chapter we will discuss the involvement of the 
renal vasculature in the early stages of hypertension and describe several mecha-
nisms which have been considered to be of importance in the development of pre-
hypertension. We will especially concentrate on the changes of renal vasculature 
and propose a hypothesis whereby endothelial cell dysfunction in prehypertension 
may lead to vascular rarefaction and therefore contributing to the development of 
hypertension in some individuals. Since only few studies exist so far in patients with 
prehypertension we will also discuss animal models and clinical studies in patients 
with early forms of hypertension. As in the case of established hypertension it is 
difficult to define whether the early vascular changes are a result of increased blood 
pressure or whether the vascular changes are responsible for the development of 
prehypertension and/or hypertension. In addition, we will limit our discussion on 
endothelial cells and their functional contribution to the development of hyperten-
sion. We will describe the role of the endothelial cell layer (1) in blood pressure 
regulation and the development of prehypertension and (2) as the structure which is 
most easily damaged by the small increase in blood pressure [6, 7]. Several investi-
gations have been carried out to define the endothelial cell alterations in prehyper -
tension. Early on Taddei and coworkers have observed that the endothelium-dependent 
vasodilation is abnormal in the offspring of patients with essential hypertension [8]. 
Investigations such as these have led to the hypothesis that endothelial dysfunction 
may promote the development of hypertension. Schlaich and his group have shown 
that in individuals with a positive family history of hypertension the metabolism of Proposed scheme of ear ly interstitial injur y in the kidne y
O2RAAS RPP SNS
Endothelial
activation
VEGFendothelial
differentiation
capillar y
rareficationEMT
medullar y
blood flo wrelease of
proteases
monocyte
infiltrationloss of
glycocalyx
interstitial
inflammationloss of
salt bu ffering
interstitial injur yAdhesion
moleculesNO
Fig. 11.1 Hypothetical scheme of the putative mechanisms underlying the early vascular and 
interstitial changes in the hypertensive kidney
H. Haller et al.151
l-arginine is altered. They could show that the uptake of the essential l-arginine is 
diminished in these individuals implicating this system in the pathogenesis of early 
hypertension [9].
The endothelial cell functions which have been analyzed in the early stages of 
hypertension and/or in prehypertension include the following systems:
 –NO and ROS system with an alteration of l-arginine metabolism
 –Endothelial cell permeability with increased leakage of albumin and other fac-
tors both to the interstitium or in the case of the glomeruli into the urine
 –The alterations in endothelial cell progenitor cells in patients with 
prehypertension
 –Inflammatory mechanisms with release of cytokines and enhanced leukocyte 
adhesion on the endothelial cell surface
 –The role of the endothelial glycocalyx
The imbalance between reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO) has 
been named oxidative stress. Oxidative stress indicates a shift and imbalance 
between the ROS and the NO system. Oxidative stress and NO deficiency have both 
been implicated in the pathophysiology of hypertension and prehypertension. The 
NO deficiency can precede the development of hypertension. The imbalance of 
NO-ROS is therefore important for the pathogenesis of high blood pressure [10, 
11]. NO deficiency can be elicited by a decreased activity of the nitric oxide syn-
thase (NOS). Both the expression and the activity of the enzyme have been demon-
strated in prehypertension. As mentioned above, a decreased availability of 
L-arginine can also be the culprit for NO deficiency [12]. Several authors have dem-
onstrated that an inhibitor of the NO system, the asymmetric dimethylargenine 
(ADMA) as an endogenous and NOS inhibitor, plays a role in the pathogenesis of 
oxidative stress and NO deficiency. ADMA can reduce the synthesis of NO and in 
addition induces superoxide reduction by uncoupling NOS [13, 14]. The cellular 
concentration of ADMA therefore regulates the local NO-ROS balance. We have 
shown in several studies that ADMA plays an important role in the development of 
hypertension and can induce high blood pressure in asymptomatic young individu-
als when it is increased [15, 16]. An increase in ADMA has not only an effect on 
vasoconstriction in different vascular beds but leads also to functional alterations in 
the brain, in the heart, and in the kidney [17, 18]. In addition to ADMA, the lack of 
intracellular antioxidants may play a role in the early stages of hypertension. The 
glutathione system (GSH) is impaired in an animal model of hypertension prior to 
the development of hypertension [19]. When these animals are treated with antioxi-
dants such as N-acetylcysteine the development of hypertension can be prevented 
and/or reduced [20]. Another possibility to influence the NO-ROS system is the 
treatment with l-arginine. The supplementation of prehypertensive animals with 
l-citrulline prevents the transition from prehypertension to hypertension in this ani-
mal model [21, 22]. In summary, the balance of oxidative stress and the NO system 
may early on influence the reactivity of the vascular wall and lead to high blood 
pressure [23]. The alterations of the ROS system have been closely associated with 11 Early Changes in Renal Vasculature in Prehypertension152
alterations of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS). The RAS plays a fundamental 
role in the regulation of blood pressure in kidney development.
Interestingly, Richard Johnson and his group have early on discovered that 
angiotensin II induced damage of the kidney, which by itself does only lead to small 
increases in blood pressure, predisposes the organ to substantial blood pressure rise 
after exposure to sodium [24, 25]. These findings which have been confirmed by 
other groups shed an interesting light on the pathophysiological changes in the kid-
ney in the early stages of hypertension [26, 27]. It has been observed that the angio-
tensin II induced damage leads to endothelial cell injury followed not only by an 
inflammatory response in the kidney but also to loss of capillaries with a rarefaction 
of the microvascular system in the kidney. The less perfused kidney which also may 
show signs of ischemia is extremely sensitive to changes in sodium intake. The fol-
lowing sequence of events is therefore possible: Either via microinflammation or by 
blood pressure induced damage by the endothelium a cascade is initiated which 
leads both to microinflammation and to verification of blood vessels. It is of interest 
that patients with prehypertension have been shown to have reduced nephron num-
ber in the kidneys which predisposes them to increases in blood pressure upon 
exposure to other risk factors [25]. Interestingly, these patients also display an 
increased sensitivity to salt. Recently, a novel hypothesis has been put forward 
which links the endothelial cell dysfunction and increased salt sensitivity.
It is well known that an excessive amount of salt in food affects the vascular 
system, leading to high blood pressure and premature disabilities. Kusche-Vihrog 
and Oberleithner [26, 27] noted that salt entering the vascular bed is transiently 
bound to the negatively charged endothelial glycocalyx, thus protecting the endo-
thelium against salt overload. The glycocalyx is a negatively charged, organized 
mesh of membranous glycoproteins, with core proteoglycans of the syndecan and 
glypican family carrying highly sulfated, linear glycosaminoglycan attachments 
(mostly of the heparan, chondroitin, and dermatan sulfate families). Hyaluronic 
acid and the negatively charged heparan sulfate proteoglycans are its major con-
stituents [28, 29]. This structure of core proteins “decorated” with long glycosami-
noglycans provides a sea-grass like surface where components of functional systems 
such as the coagulation cascade or the complement system can be located and 
plasma constituents may interact intensely and dynamically (Fig.  11.2). Heparan 
sulfates displays high affinities for polycationic molecules. In addition, they also 
provide a significant storage volume which is easily accessible from the fluid phase. 
Oberleithner et al. suggested that plasma sodium is stored in the glycocalyx par -
tially neutralizing the negative surface charges [26, 27]. A “good” glycocalyx has a 
high sodium store capacity but still maintains sufficient surface negativity at normal 
plasma sodium. A “bad” glycocalyx shows the opposite. Thus proteoglycans and 
glycosaminoglycans (i.e., mainly extracellular polyanions) may provide potential 
sinks for sodium and may serve as a means of concentrating cations close to the 
plasma membrane. It was shown that heparan sulfates adsorbed to a surface undergo 
a conformational change when exposed to flow: Their core proteins unfold from a 
random coil to an extended filament and their HS chains elongate significantly. This 
finding was used to illustrate how sodium ions bound to heparan sulfates could not 
H. Haller et al.153
only be stored but be delivered by the stretched glycosaminoglycan to their trans-
porter channels. Such a concept of “storage space” in an intact glycocalyx has 
important implications for the binding of cations to the heparan sulfates of the gly-
cocalyx, thereby regulating the sodium content in a third space. A degraded glyco-
calyx (by cardiovascular risk factors) increases the salt permeability of the vascular 
system resulting in one form of hypertension. In a related study, Pot et al. [30] pre-
sented evidence that the SHR rat has an elevated systemic level of proteases, includ-
ing MMPs, involved in cell membrane receptor cleavage. They showed that RBCs 
from SHR rats are subject to enhanced glycocalyx cleavage compared to the RBCs 
of the normotensive WKY rats. These blood-borne MMPs have access to the glyco-
calyx on cell surfaces, providing a mechanism for the parallel degradation of the 
glycocalyx. Interestingly, in diabetes and in hypertension the glycocalyx is dimin-
ished, further supporting a role of the endothelial cell surface in the early stages of 
hypertension [31].
The second possibly altered function of the endothelium in the prehypertensive 
state is microinflammation. In the renal microcirculation the endothelial cells are 
responsible for release of inflammatory cytokines and adhesion of leukocytes with 
subsequent transmigration of the inflammatory cells into the surrounding tissue 
[32–34]. Several studies have shown that there is a link between elevated markers of 
inflammation and the risk of developing hypertension [35–39]. In recent years a 
wave study has shown and further investigated the links between inflammation, 
hypertension, and organ damage (for review [40, 41]). Early on it has been observed 
glycoproteins
glypicans versicansheparan
sulfateplasma molecules
growth f actors
i.e. FGF , VEGF
chemokines
i.e. MCP-1
albumin,
cationic
peptides etc.hyaluronic
acid
chondroitin
sulfateother
proteo-
glcycanssyndecansglycan chains
Fig. 11.2 Schematic diagram showing the components and spatial organization of the endothelial 
glycocalyx11 Early Changes in Renal Vasculature in Prehypertension154
that there is a link between the oxidative stress and microinflammation. Inflammatory 
cells are potent sources of ROS. The interaction between the reactive oxygen spe-
cies and inflammation is complex. Blood pressure elevations can lead to end-organ 
damage by driving the generation of ROS in the vasculature, the kidney, and the 
nervous system. However, other studies have characterized a converse relationship 
where ROS generated within these cardiovascular organs promote activation of cir -
culating immune cells and thereby results in a dangerous positive feedback system 
that exaggerates hypertensive response following an initial endothelial cell injury. 
For the kidney the relationship between inflammation ROS and blood pressure ele-
vation is especially challenging due to the critical role of the kidney in regulating 
sodium excretion and therefore intravascular volume. Inflammatory responses or 
oxidative stress localized in the kidney can therefore be the cause of the result of 
changes in blood pressure. This complicated relationship has not become easier to 
understand by recent findings that sodium by itself can influence the inflammatory 
response.
An increase in circulating levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), 
C-reactive protein (CRP), and leukocytes compared to normotensive controls have 
been observed [38, 39]. Some studies have shown that higher CRP levels or leuko-
cyte counts may predict the onset of hypertension is associated in prehypertension. 
Already in the early stages of hypertension elevated levels of endothelial cell adhe-
sion molecules that facilitate the binding of mononuclear cells in the microcircula-
tion of kidney and the heart have been observed [40]. Also released chemokines 
from the endothelial cells are present in the vasculature of patients in the early 
stages of hypertension. The major question is whether these patients have an 
increased immune response which causes an increase in blood pressure or whether 
the increase in blood pressure induces endothelial cell damage, thereby leading to 
an inflammatory response.
An important structure which mediates the inflammatory change on the surface 
of the endothelium is the glycocalyx. The glycocalyx and its glycosaminoglycans 
play an important role in various aspects of inflammation and in the physiological 
functioning of a range of inflammatory mediators, including chemokines, growth 
factors, endothelial adhesion molecules and inflammatory cell emigration. Studies 
suggest that at least two mechanisms of the glycocalyx, a change in glycosamin 
composition as well as enzymatic disruption of the proteoglycans, may have a 
strong effect on inflammatory responses. A change in glycosamin composition of 
the glycocalyx affects the early inflammatory mechanisms in several ways: van der 
Vlag and his group have demonstrated that an early response of the glycocalyx to 
inflammatory stimuli is a change in the N-deacetylase-N-sulfotransferase-mediated 
composition of the heparan sulfate. They have argued that modulation of heparan 
sulfates in the endothelial glycocalyx significantly reduces or enhances the inflam-
matory response in inflammatory kidney disease [42, 43].
In this brief review we have focused on the microvascular changes in patients 
with prehypertension or in the early stages of hypertension. We have demonstrated 
that the endothelium is of extreme importance in these early stages. These cells 
transmit both the injury and the reaction to other stimuli such as hyperlipidemia and 
H. Haller et al.155
hyperglycemia resulting in microinflammation, an increase in reactive oxygen spe-
cies and decreased NO availability. These early stages may lead to endothelial cell 
dysfunction and to a cascade of events leading to interstitial injury and rarefaction 
of the blood vessels in the kidney rendering the organ more susceptible to further 
damage. In the future it will be important to define which pathophysiology is pres-
ent in individual patients and design better diagnostic tools to analyze the patho-
physiology in our prehypertensive patients. Analysis of the endothelial glycocalyx 
and its early changes are a promising novel field of diagnosis and, possibly, early 
treatment strategies.
References
 1. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, Jones DW, 
Materson BJ, Oparil S, Wright JT Jr, Roccella EJ.  Seventh report of the Joint National 
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. 
Hypertension. 2003;42:1206–52.
 2. Wang Y , Wang QJ.  The prevalence of prehypertension and hypertension among US adults 
according to the new joint national committee guide- lines: new challenges of the old problem. 
Arch Intern Med. 2004;164:2126–34.
 3. Julius S, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, Weber MA, Michelson EL, Kaciroti N, Black HR, Grimm 
RH Jr, Messerli FH, Oparil S, Schork MA. Feasibility of treating prehypertension with an 
angiotensin-receptor blocker. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:1685–97.
 4. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, Evans JC, O’Donnell CJ, Kannel WB, Levy D. Impact of high- 
normal blood pressure on the risk of cardiovas- cular disease. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1291–7.
 5. Menne J, Ritz E, Ruilope LM, Chatzikyrkou C, Viberti G, Haller H.  The Randomized 
Olmesartan and Diabetes Microalbuminuria Prevention (ROADMAP) observational follow-up 
study: benefits of RAS blockade with olmesartan treatment are sustained after study discon-
tinuation. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014;3(2):e000810.
 6. Deanfield JE, Halcox JP, Rabelink TJ. Endothelial function and dys-function: testing and clini-
cal relevance. Circulation. 2007;115:1285–95.
 7. Landmesser U, Hornig B, Drexler H. Endothelial function: a critical determinant in atheroscle-
rosis? Circulation. 2004;109:II27–33.
 8. Taddei S, Virdis A, Mattei P, Ghiadoni L, Sudano I, Salvetti A. Defective L-arginine-nitric 
oxide pathway in offspring of essential hypertensive patients. Circulation. 1996;94:1298–303.
 9. Schlaich MP, Parnell MM, Ahlers BA, Finch S, Marshall T, Zhang WZ, Kaye DM. Impaired 
L-arginine transport and endothelial function in hypertensive and genetically predisposed nor -
motensive subjects. Circulation. 2004;110:3680–6.
 10. Baylis C. Nitric oxide synthase derangements and hypertension in kidney disease. Curr Opin 
Nephrol Hypertens. 2012;21:1–6.
 11. Vaziri ND. Roles of oxidative stress and antioxidant therapy in chronic kidney disease and 
hypertension. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2004;13:93–9.
 12. Wilcox CS. Oxidative stress and nitric oxide deficiency in the kidney: a critical link to hyper -
tension? Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2005;289:R913–35.
 13. Teerlink T, Luo Z, Palm F, Wilcox CS. Cellular ADMA: regulation and action. Pharmacol Res. 
2009;60:448–60.
 14. Schwedhelm E, Böger RH. The role of asymmetric and symmetric dimethylarginines in renal 
disease. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2011;7:275–85.
 15. Kielstein JT, Donnerstag F, Gasper S, Menne J, Kielstein A, Martens-Lobenhoffer J, Scalera F, 
Cooke JP, Fliser D, Bode-Böger SM. ADMA increases arterial stiffness and decreases cerebral 
blood flow in humans. Stroke. 2006;37(8):2024–9.11 Early Changes in Renal Vasculature in Prehypertension156
 16. Kielstein JT, Simmel S, Bode-Böger SM, Roth HJ, Schmidt-Gayk H, Haller H, Fliser 
D. Subpressor dose asymmetric dimethylarginine modulates renal function in humans through 
nitric oxide synthase inhibition. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2004;27(3):143–7.
 17. Surdacki A, Nowicki M, Sandmann J, Tsikas D, Boeger RH, Bode-Boeger SM, Kruszelnicka- 
Kwiatkowska O, Kokot F, Dubiel JS, Froelich JC. Reduced urinary excretion of nitric oxide 
metabolites and increased plasma levels of asymmetric dimethylarginine in men with essential 
hypertension. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1999;33:652–8.
 18. Tain YL, Baylis C. Determination of dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase activity in the 
kidney. Kidney Int. 2007;72:886–9.
 19. Lee SK, Arunkumar S, Sirajudeen KN, Singh HJ. Glutathione system in young spontaneously 
hypertensive rats. J Physiol Biochem. 2010;66:321–7.
 20. Fan NC, Tsai CM, Hsu CN, Huang LT, Tain YL. N-Acetylcysteine prevents hypertension via 
regulation of the ADMA–DDAH pathway in young spontaneously hypertensive rats. Biomed 
Res Int. 2013;2013:696317.
 21. Chien SJ, Lin KM, Kuo HC, Huang CF, Lin YJ, Huang LT, Tain YL. Two different approaches 
to restore renal nitric oxide and prevent hypertension in young spontaneously hypertensive 
rats: L-Citrulline and nitrate. Transl Res. 2014;163:43–52.
 22. Carlström M, Persson AE, Larsson E, Hezel M, Scheffer PG, Teerlink T, Weitzberg E, 
Lundberg JO. Dietary nitrate attenuates oxidative stress, prevents cardiac and renal injuries, 
and reduces blood pressure in salt-induced hypertension. Cardiovasc Res. 2011;89:574–85.
 23. Böger RH, Maas R, Schulze F, Schwedhelm E. Asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) as a 
prospective marker of cardiovascular disease and mortality—an update on patient populations 
with a wide range of cardiovascular risk. Pharmacol Res. 2009;60:481–7.
 24. Johnson RJ, Gordon KL, Giachelli C, Kurth T, Skelton MM, Cowley AW Jr. Tubulointerstitial 
injury and loss of nitric oxide synthases parallel the development of hypertension in the 
Dahl-SS rat. J Hypertens. 2000;18:1497–505.
 25. Johnson RJ, Gordon KL, Suga S, Duijvestijn AM, Griffin K, Bidani A. Renal injury and salt- 
sensitive hypertension after exposure to catecholamines. Hypertension. 1999;34:151–9.
 26. Kusche-Vihrog K, Oberleithner H. An emerging concept of vascular salt sensitivity. F1000 
Biol Rep. 2012;4:20.
 27. Oberleithner H. Vascular endothelium: a vulnerable transit zone for merciless sodium. Nephrol 
Dial Transplant. 2014;29:240–6.
 28. Pries AR, Secomb TW, Gaehtgens P.  The endothelial surface layer. Pflugers Arch. 
2000;440:653–66.
 29. Reitsma S, Slaaf DW, Vink H, van Zandvoort MA, Oude Egbrink MG. The endothelial glyco-
calyx: composition, functions, and visualization. Pflugers Arch. 2007;454(3):345–59.
 30. Pot C, Chen AY , Ha JN, Schmid-Schonbein GW. Proteolytic cleavage of the red blood cell 
glycocalyx in a genetic form of hypertension. Cell Mol Bioeng. 2011;4:678–92.
 31. Kumase F, Morizane Y , Mohri S, Takasu I, Ohtsuka A, Ohtsuki H. Glycocalyx degradation in 
retinal and choroidal capillary endothelium in rats with diabetes and hypertension. Acta Med 
Okayama. 2010;64:277–83.
 32. Parra G, Quiroz Y , Salazar J, Bravo Y , Pons H, Chavez M, Johnson RJ, Rodriguez-Iturbe 
B. Experimental induction of salt-sensitive hypertension is associated with lym- phocyte pro-
liferative response to HSP70. Kidney Int Suppl. 2008;74:S55–9.
 33. Muller DN, Dechend R, Mervaala EMA, Park J-K, Schmidt F, Fiebeler A, Theuer J, Breu V , 
Ganten D, Haller H, Luft FC.  NF-{kappa}B inhibition ameliorates angiotensin II-induced 
inflammatory damage in rats. Hypertension. 2000;35:193–201.
 34. Muller DN, Shagdarsuren E, Park JK, Dechend R, Mervaala E, Hampich F, Fiebeler A, 
Ju X, Finckenberg P, Theuer J, Viedt C, Kreuzer J, Heidecke H, Haller H, Zenke M, Luft 
FC. Immunosuppressive treatment protects against angiotensin II-induced renal damage. Am J 
Pathol. 2002;161:1679–93.
 35. Kim M, Jung S, Yeon Kim S, Lee S-H, Lee JH.  Prehypertension-associated elevation in 
circulating lysophosphatidlycholines, Lp-PLA 2 activity, and oxidative stress. PLoS One. 
2014;9(5):e96735.
H. Haller et al.157
 36. Niskanen L, Laaksonen DE, Nyyssonen K, Punnonen K, Valkonen VP, Fuentes R, Tuomainen 
TP, Salonen R, Salonen JT. Inflammation, abdominal obesity, and smoking as predictors of 
hypertension. Hypertension. 2004;44:859–65.
 37. Gesso HD, Buring JE, Rifai N, Blake GJ, Gaziano JM, Ridker PM. C-reactive protein and the 
risk of developing hypertension. JAMA. 2003;290:2945–51.
 38. Tatsukawa Y , Hsu WL, Yamada M, Cologne JB, Suzuki G, Yamamoto H, Yamane K, Akahoshi 
M, Fujiwara S, Kohno N. White blood cell count, especially neutrophil count, as a predictor of 
hypertension in a Japanese popu-lation. Hypertens Res. 2008;31:1391–7.
 39. Stumpf C, John S, Jukic J, Yilmaz A, Raaz D, Schmieder RE, Daniel WG, Garlichs 
CD. Enhanced levels of platelet P- selectin and circulating cytokines in young patients with 
mild arterial hypertension. J Hypertens. 2005;23:995–1000.
 40. McMaster WG, Kirabo A, Madhur MS, Harrison DG. Inflammation, immunity, and hyperten-
sive end-organ damage. Circ Res. 2015;116(6):1022–33.
 41. Foss JD, Kirabo A, Harrison DG. Do high-salt microenvironments drive hypertensive inflam-
mation? Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2017;312(1):R1–4.
 42. Rops AL, Loeven MA, van Gemst JJ, Eversen I, Van Wijk XM, Dijkman HB, van Kuppevelt 
TH, Berden JH, Rabelink TJ, Esko JD, van der Vlag J. Modulation of heparan sulfate in the 
glomerular endothelial glycocalyx decreases leukocyte influx during experimental glomerulo-
nephritis. Kidney Int. 2014;86(5):932–42.
 43. Rops AL, van den Hoven MJ, Baselmans MM, Lensen JF, Wijnhoven TJ, van den Heuvel LP, 
van Kuppevelt TH, Berden JH, van der Vlag J. Heparan sulfate domains on cultured activated 
glomerular endothelial cells mediate leukocyte trafficking. Kidney Int. 2008;73(1):52–62.11 Early Changes in Renal Vasculature in Prehypertension159 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_12
C. Cuspidi ( *) 
Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
Clinical Research Unit, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Meda, Italy
e-mail: cesare.cuspidi@unimib.it 
M. Tadic 
Department of Cardiology, Charité-University-Medicine Campus Virchow Klinikum,  
Berlin, Germany 
G. Grassi 
Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy 
IRCCS Multimedica, Sesto San Giovanni, Milan, Italy12Heart and Prehypertension
Cesare Cuspidi, Marijana Tadic, and Guido Grassi
12.1  Introduction
Asymptomatic alterations of the cardiovascular system reflect intermediate stages 
in the disease continuum linking risk factors such as high blood pressure (BP), 
hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, obesity, and smoking to cardiovascular fatal and 
nonfatal events. In particular, a variety of manifestations of subclinical target organ 
damage such as left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), LV systolic/diastolic dysfunc-
tion, abnormalities in small, medium, and large size arteries, and renal impairment 
have been reported to be associated with systemic hypertension [1, 2].
An increasing and consistent body of evidence supports the view that these 
markers of cardiac and extra-cardiac organ damage are powerful predictors of car -
diovascular disease over and beyond BP levels and traditional risk factors [3–6]. As 
for the heart, systemic hypertension adversely affects cardiac structure and function 
by inducing a wide array of morpho-functional changes including myocyte hyper -
trophy and fibrosis resulting in alterations of both LV contractility and relaxation, 
left atrial (LA) enlargement and aortic root (AR) dilatation [7, 8]. Hypertensive 
heart disease, the cardinal marker of subclinical organ damage, is the result of long-
term exposure of LV to pressure overload in combination to a variety of unhealthy 160
non-modifiable and modifiable factors, often associated to elevated BP. In fact, the 
magnitude of cardiac morpho-functional alterations secondary to hypertension is 
not only dependent on the severity and time of exposure to BP overload but also to 
several racial, demographic, and clinical variables, such as black ethnicity, age, gen-
der, type 2 diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome, obesity, sleep apnea syndrome, 
and renal disease.
Prehypertensive status (i.e., BP ranging from 120 to 139 mmHg systolic and/or 
from 80 to 89 mmHg diastolic in adult subjects not taking any BP lowering drugs) 
has been consistently shown to be associated with increased risk of incident cardio-
vascular disease, this is because the linear and continuous relationship between BP 
levels and cardiovascular events, starting at BP values of 115 and 75 mmHg, has 
been documented by a historical meta-analysis of 61 prospective studies including 
approximately one million people [9].
The findings provided by this meta-analysis indicated that mortality from isch-
emic heart disease and stroke in individuals aged 40–89 years increases in a log-
linear relationship with BP, from levels greater or equal to 115/75 mmHg. More 
recently, subgroup analyses of pooled data from 468,561 participants recruited in 18 
prospective cohort studies showed even for low-range prehypertension, the risk of 
cardiovascular disease was significantly higher than for optimal BP: (RR = 1.46, 
95% CI  =  1.32–1.62), and further increased with high-range prehypertension 
(RR = 1.80, 95% CI = 1.41–2.31) [10].
In view of the fact that the prehypertension has been recognized as a risk factor 
for incident cardiovascular disease, numerous studies, mostly conducted over the 
past decade, have investigated the relationship between subclinical organ damage 
and this BP phenotype.
This chapter reviews the literature providing evidence on the association between 
prehypertension and cardiac abnormalities such as LVH, systolic/diastolic dysfunc-
tion, LA and AR dilatation, as assessed by echocardiography. These findings will be 
discussed in detail in separate subsections.
12.2  Left Ventricular Structure
In early phases of systemic hypertension, LVH can be regarded as a response to 
pressure overload aimed at reducing ventricular wall stress. At this stage, LVH is an 
adaptive change facilitating cardiac work primarily via the growth of cardiomyo-
cytes. Two aspects concerning this process need to be considered. First, LVH is 
associated with expression of fetal isoforms of myocardial proteins such as β-myosin 
heavy chain, β-troponin, and skeletal α-actin. Thus, LVH is a likely consequence of 
a re-expression of an early stage of myocardial growth rather than an increased 
synthesis of normal contractile proteins. Second, the long-term pressure overload 
may stimulate pro-collagen gene expression and collagen protein synthesis leading 
to collagen deposition and fibrosis. Myocardial fibrosis, accompanying hyperten-
sive LVH, reflects a very complex process resulting from the imbalance between 
stimulatory and inhibitory factors that control fibrillar collagen turnover [11].
C. Cuspidi et al.161
In the subsequent phases, experimental and clinical studies have proven that per -
sistence/ progression LVH causes several negative effects, such as impaired myocar -
dial relaxation, leading to diastolic dysfunction, LA remodeling, reduced coronary 
reserve, atrial/ventricular arrhythmias, and ultimately systolic dysfunction, the 
patho-physiologic substrate carrying a high risk for overt cardiovascular disease.
The first large population-based study aimed to examine specifically the cardiac 
and systemic hemodynamic status of prehypertension was performed in 1940 ado-
lescent and young adult American Indian participants of the Strong Heart Study 
(age < 40 years), a population in which obesity, diabetes, and hypertension were 
highly prevalent [12]. Compared with the non-hypertensive group, prehypertensive 
participants were more likely to be men (52% vs. 38%), to be obese (65% vs. 53%), 
and to have type 2 diabetes (9% vs. 6%) and impaired fasting glucose (6% vs. 3%), 
respectively. Prehypertensive subjects had, on average, thicker interventricular sep-
tal and LV posterior walls than normotensive participants. Both LV chamber diam-
eter and relative wall thickness were increased in the prehypertensive groups. As a 
result, LV mass indexed for body surface area and height to its allometric power of 
2.7 was higher in the prehypertensive group. Furthermore, the prevalence of LVH 
was twofold higher in prehypertensive participants than in their normotensive coun-
terparts. As for classification of LV geometric patterns, according to Ganau et al. 
[13], eccentric LVH was approximately twofold higher in the cases than in normo-
tensive controls. Of note, in the Strong Heart Study the overall prevalence of con-
centric LVH was rare (0.4), this was also the case for LV concentric remodeling.
Further important data on the association between prehypertension and LV mor -
phology have obtained in a large, biracial community based cohort of elderly men 
and women (mean age  >  70  years) by the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities 
Study Investigators (14). Participants with prehypertension had greater LV mass 
index (73.6 ± 14.8 g/m2) and LV wall thickness (0.94 ± 0.11 cm) than those with 
optimal BP (69.9 ± 16.4 g/m2 and 0.91 ± 0.12 cm, respectively), but lower than 
those with hypertension. These differences remained statistically significant after 
multivariable analysis adjusted by age, sex, race, heart rate, body mass index, dia-
betes, and estimated glomerular filtration rate. Yet, compared to participants with 
optimal BP, those with prehypertension had a higher prevalence of abnormal LV 
geometry (concentric hypertrophy, eccentric hypertrophy, or concentric remodel-
ing) of borderline statistical significance (adjusted P value = 0.05).
Other information comes from studies that have included individuals with a 
wider range of age and therefore more representative of the impact of prehyperten-
sion on cardiac damage in the general population than those restricted to young or 
elderly population-based samples. Among 10,547 subjects (1651 normotensive, 
3616 prehypertensive, and 5280 hypertensive participants) examined in a cross-
sectional survey in a northeast rural Chinese area, a gradual and significant increase 
in absolute LV mass and LV mass index (regardless the type of indexation for body 
size) was found across the three BP categories [15]. The prevalence LVH resulted to 
be statistically different among three groups (P < 0.001), being the rates of LVH 
5.9%, 8.6%, 28.4% by indexing LV mass to height2.7 and 4.9%, 5.3%, 19.3% by 
indexing LV mass to BSA, respectively. Finally, the prevalence rates of abnormal 12 Heart and Prehypertension162
LV geometric patterns such as eccentric hypertrophy, concentric remodeling, and 
concentric hypertrophy were 7.3%, 5.3%, and 1.4% in prehypertensive, and 5.1%, 
6.4%, and 0.8% in normotensive participants.
The Kangbuk Samsung Cohort Study, which included a very large sample of 
Korean men and women (55,211, mean age 40 years) undergoing a thorough medical 
health check-up program, reported a clear dose–response relationship between unfa-
vorable LV structural changes and five BP categories: i.e., normotensive (n  = 35,086), 
prehypertensive (n  = 9.283), controlled hypertensive (n  = 4795), newly recognized 
hypertensive (n  = 1818), and uncontrolled hypertensive groups (n  = 1129) [16]. The 
proportion of LVH was 0.9% in the normotensive group, 1.6% in the prehypertensive 
group, 4.9% in controlled hypertensives, 3.4% in newly recognized hypertensives, 
and 8.1% in uncontrolled hypertensives. The rates of increased relative wall thick-
ness and LV geometry changes also showed similar trends.
Although prehypertension is not a static condition because it can often progress 
over time to hypertension or less frequently shift to normotension, the clinical sig-
nificance of such temporal variations to date has been poorly investigated by pro-
spective studies. The Investigators of the MONICA/KORA Augsburg study 
evaluated whether changes in LV geometry and function that occur with 10 years of 
ageing differ between individuals who remain normotensive and those who have 
persistent prehypertension over that period (17). In cross-sectional comparisons of 
the baseline study, LV mass indexed to height2.7 was slightly higher in the prehyper -
tensive group; this was not the case for other echocardiographic parameters such as 
LV wall thickness, relative wall thickness, LV end-diastolic diameter, and LV mass. 
At the follow-up examination, the persistent prehypertensive group had signifi-
cantly higher adjusted mean values for absolute as well as for relative wall thick-
ness, LV mass and LV mass indexed to height2.7 as compared with the persistent 
normotensive group. These findings support the view that long-standing prehyper -
tension appears to be associated with a significantly increased occurrence of LV 
structural changes.
Emerging evidence indicates that masked hypertension is a BP phenotype asso-
ciated with increased cardiovascular risk as compared to true normotension. The 
term masked hypertension, coined for the first time in the early 2000s by Pickering 
et al. [18], is currently used to define a subgroup hypertensive subjects with normal 
office and elevated out-of-office BP. Observational studies focusing on demographic 
and clinical characteristics of masked hypertension reported that prehypertension is 
a key variable differentiating masked hypertensive individuals from normotensive 
ones. The Masked Hypertension Study, a worksite-based population, showed that 
prevalence of masked hypertension was approximately tenfold greater in prehyper -
tensive participants (34.1%) than in those with optimal clinic BP (3.9%) [19]. As for 
subclinical cardiac damage, compared with subjects with optimal clinic BP, LV 
mass index was significantly greater in prehypertensive group with masked hyper -
tension, after adjusting for several confounders.
On the whole, consistent findings support the view that even small elevations in 
BP, as seen with prehypertension, can have detrimental effects on LV structure and 
geometry across different age ranges and ethnicities [20–22] (Tables 12.1 and 12.2).
C. Cuspidi et al.163Table 12.1 Summary of seven population-based studies reporting data on prevalence of left ventricular hypertrophy, as assessed by echocardiography, in 
normotensive, prehypertensive, and hypertensive subjects
Author, Reference Year of publication Total sample size, n Age, years Normotensives (%) Prehypertensives (%) Hypertensives (%)
Drukteinis et al. [12] 2007 1940 26.8 ± 7.7 6.5 11.4 19.9
Topraka2009 1204 35.5 ± 5.0 3.6 8.8 n.a.
Kim et al. [36] 2011 1671 52.5 ± 5.3 17.5 22.6 n.a.
Urbina et al. [29] 2011 723 18.0 ± 3.1 7.6 7.7 22.6
Santos et al. [14] 2016 4871 75.0 ± 5.0 36.0 44.0 51.0
Li et al. [15] 2016 10,547 52.0 ± 10.0 459 8.6 28.4
Jung et al. [16] 2017 52,111 40.3 ± 8.1 0.9 1.6 5.0
Data are shown as absolute numbers, percentages, means ± standard deviation. In the study by Santos et al. data regarding prevalence of left ventricular hyper -
trophy include left ventricular concentric remodeling. Left ventricular mass was indexed by body surface area in the studies by Santos et al. and Jung et al. and 
by height to allometric power of 2.7 in the other reports
aToprak et al. J Hypertens 2009; 27: 243–250
Table 12.2 Summary of four population-based studies reporting data on prevalence of abnormal left ventricular geometric patterns, as assessed by echocar -
diography, in normotensive, prehypertensive, and hypertensive subjects
Author, 
ReferenceYear of 
publication Total sample size, n Age, yearsNormotensives Prehypertensives Hypertensives
CR 
(%)CH 
(%)EH 
(%)CR 
(%)CH 
(%)EH 
(%)CR 
(%)CH 
(%)EH 
(%)
Drukteinis [12] 2007 1940 26.8 ± 7.7 0.7 0.4 6.1 1.4 0.3 11.1 1.8 0 19.9
Urbina [29] 2011 723 18.0 ± 3.1 0.8 3.4 3.4 0 3.1 4.6 5.5 4.7 13.4
Li [15] 2016 10,547 52.0 ± 10.0 6.4 0.8 5.1 5.3 1.4 7.3 8.8 10.6 17.8
Jung [16] 2017 52,111 40.3 ± 8.1 2.2 0.1 0.8 5.0 0.3 1.3 8.7 1.2 3.8
Data are shown as absolute numbers, percentages, means  ±  standard deviation; CR concentric remodeling, CH concentric hypertrophy, EH eccentric 
hypertrophy12 Heart and Prehypertension164
12.3  Left Ventricular Function
As already mentioned the left ventricular systolic function tends to deteriorate only 
in advanced stages of the natural history of hypertension. Accordingly, the results 
concerning conventional and prognostically validated echocardiographic indices of 
LV systolic function (such as ejection fraction or fractional shortening) obtained in 
many studies conducted in subjects with hypertension showed no significant 
changes compared to their counterparts with optimal BP.
However, the development of new imaging modalities and especially the intro-
duction of speckle tracking imaging and strain in clinical research enabled a detailed 
analysis of cardiac mechanics and detection of subtle subclinical myocardial dam-
age that previously had not been recognized. Only a few studies based on two-
dimensional and three-dimensional speckle tracking imaging have addressed this 
topic in prehypertensive subjects [23, 24].
Our group assessed the presence of subclinical LV myocardial dysfunction in 
subjects with optimal (n  =  49), high-normal BP (n  =  50) and untreated arterial 
hypertension (n  =  50), using three-dimensional echocardiography strain analysis 
[24]. Three-dimensional global longitudinal strain was significantly lower in the 
high-normal BP group and the hypertensive patients, in comparison with the opti-
mal BP group. Similar results were obtained for three-dimensional global circum-
ferential strain as well for three-dimensional global radial strain, and global area 
strain.
Therefore, in this section will report in detail data concerning exclusively LV 
diastolic function, as assessed by conventional Doppler analysis and tissue Doppler 
imaging.
Echocardiography is the reference method for diagnosing heart failure with pre-
served ejection fraction and identifying early diastolic alterations in asymptomatic 
patients at high cardiovascular risk [25].
A large amount of evidence highlights that the assessment of diastolic function 
by using conventional Doppler and tissue Doppler imaging may provide relevant 
predictive information about cardiovascular morbidity and mortality independently 
from LV mass, LV geometry, and traditional risk factors.
Alterations of diastolic properties in the hypertensive heart may be related to a 
complex interplay of factors including increased BP itself, structural LV changes 
(i.e., increased collagen matrix, disorganization of collagen fibers, abnormal colla-
gen type I/III ratio), and coronary microcirculation impairment [26]. The associa-
tion between LVH (and particularly of concentric type) and diastolic dysfunction 
has been largely reported either in population-based studies as in hypertensive 
cohorts [27].
The estimation of LV diastolic dysfunction rates in the hypertensive setting is 
a difficult task due to differences in demographic/clinical characteristics of the 
subjects examined as well as in diagnostic criteria. Prevalence rates of diastolic 
dysfunction reported in recent literature indicate that at least one-quarter of 
asymptomatic hypertensive subjects older than 50  years can have LV diastolic 
dysfunction [28].
C. Cuspidi et al.165
In the prehypertensive setting early LV diastolic alterations have been described 
cohorts with different demographic and clinical characteristics. In the Strong Heart 
study, the percentage of young participants with prolonged isovolumic relaxation 
time was greater in the hypertensive and prehypertensive groups, which also exhib-
ited higher peak mitral late velocity (A) and atrial filling fractions than reference 
group with optimal BP [14]. Hypertensive and prehypertensive participants had sig-
nificantly lower mean mitral early diastolic peak flow velocity (E), early to late 
diastolic peak flow velocity E/A ratios, suggesting slightly impaired LV relaxation 
counterbalanced by a greater atrial contribution to LV ventricular filling. Similar 
results have been shown by Urbina et al. [29] in 479 adolescents and young adults 
in which diastolic function was more completely assessed by both conventional 
Doppler and tissue Doppler indices. A graded decrease in diastolic function was 
observed from normotensive, to prehypertensive and to hypertensive subjects.
In keeping with the findings of the aforementioned studies, an independent asso-
ciation between diastolic dysfunction and prehypertension was described by Jang 
et al. [30] in a large sample of apparently healthy Korean adults aged 40–64 years 
who underwent routine health examinations.
The proportion of diastolic dysfunction grade 1 or 2 (as defined according to 
according to the guidelines of the American Society of Echocardiography) was sig-
nificantly higher in prehypertensive (31.0%) and hypertensive (38.0%) groups com-
pared to the normotensive group (19.1%). Diastolic dysfunction was more frequently 
found in men than in women and showed a continuous and positive relationship 
with office BP and body mass index.
In the biracial cohort of elderly men and women examined in the ARIC study, 
diastolic parameters such as E/A ratio, early (Ei) diastolic annular peak velocity, 
and the ratio of trans-mitral flow velocity to annular velocity (E/Ei) were impaired 
in participants with prehypertension which therefore had higher prevalence of mild 
and moderate-severe diastolic dysfunction compared to those with optimal BP [14]. 
Of note, these differences in LV diastolic function remained significant after adjust-
ing for important clinical covariates.
12.4  Left Atrium
LA enlargement is currently regarded as a reliable biomarker of LV pressure and 
volume overload [31]. Consequently, LA size is increased in several cardiac disor -
ders such as mitral, aortic valve disease, myocardial diseases as well as arterial 
hypertension. In hypertensive heart disease, LA dilatation is an indicator of chroni-
cally elevated LV filling pressure and diastolic dysfunction even in the absence of 
mitral diseases.
A direct correlation between LA size and the circulating levels of brain natri-
uretic peptide has been reported in patients with chronic heart failure and preserved 
systolic function as well as in hypertensive patients with LVH and diastolic dys-
function. Although the increase in LA chamber may be a compensatory mechanism 
counterbalancing early alterations in LV relaxation and filling and the worsening of 12 Heart and Prehypertension166
LV diastolic performance in the hypertrophied ventricle, LA enlargement can 
develop well before the onset of a frank LVH.
Some authors have shown that in recently diagnosed essential hypertensive 
patients without LVH, LA size is directly associated with BP, LV mass index, and 
brain natriuretic peptide [32].
In general, population-based samples and in hypertensive cohorts LA diameter 
has been identified as an independent correlate of incident atrial fibrillation and 
stroke [33, 34]. In addition, a significant association has been reported between LA 
size and incident CV death or congestive heart failure, after adjusting for major 
confounders. In the Pressioni Monitorate e Loro Associazioni (PAMELA) study the 
incidence of new-onset LAE increased significantly from the lowest to the highest 
tertile of baseline office, home and 24 h BP, body mass index, fasting blood glucose, 
and LV mass index. In multivariate analysis baseline LA diameter, female gender 
office systolic BP, body mass index, LV mass index emerged as key predictors of 
new-onset LA enlargement [35].
Data focusing on the involvement of the LA in prehypertension are really more 
scant than those addressing the structure and function of the LV . Another limitation 
that deserves mention refers to different echocardiographic parameters used by vari-
ous authors to estimate LA size such as anteroposterior diameter, atrial area, non-
indexed or indexed for body surface area atrial volume. This heterogeneity of atrial 
parameters makes it difficult to compare the results of available studies. 
Prehypertensive subjects enrolled in The Korean Genome Epidemiology Study dis-
played a significantly higher LA volume (45.3 ± 10.3 mL) than their normotensive 
counterparts (42.6 ± 10.5 mL), the difference between the two groups persisted to 
be significant after adjustment for age, gender, body mass index, heart rate, physical 
activity, smoking, alcohol consumption, fasting glucose, and total cholesterol [36]. 
A gradual increase in LA size from normotension to hypertension was recently 
demonstrated by Jung et al. in a general Korean population [16]. Prehypertensive 
subjects had intermediate LA diameter values (35.4 ± 4.3 mm) between normoten-
sive (33.0 ± 4.3 mm) and hypertensive participants (36.7 ± 4.2 mm).
It is worth of note, however, that other population-based studies failed to demon-
strate a more pronounced LA involvement in prehypertension. The largest of these 
negative reports was the ARIC study [14]. In that elderly population LA volume 
indexed to body surface area was slightly but not significantly higher in the prehy-
pertensive group (24.0 ± 7.4 mL/m2) than in those belonging to optimal BP category 
(23.2 ± 7.4). In line with the aforementioned findings Jang et al. (30) did not find 
difference in LA volume index between normotensive (26.5 ± 6.5 mL/m2) and pre-
hypertensive subjects (26.6 ± 6.6 mL/m2).
12.5  Aortic Root
Growing evidence from studies conducted in the general population and in hyper -
tensive cohorts indicates that AR dilatation may be regarded as a sign of subclinical 
cardiac organ damage paralleling other markers of established prognostic value 
C. Cuspidi et al.167
such as LVH, LV diastolic dysfunction, and LA dilatation [37]. Indeed, AR dilata-
tion, affecting the most proximal portion of the systemic arterial tree, has been 
shown to occur more frequently in hypertensive than in normotensives individuals 
as well as in patients with LVH than in those with normal LV mass [38]. In the 
PAMELA population office and out-of-office systolic BP and diastolic BP have 
been shown to have a direct, significant correlation with absolute and indexed AR 
diameter in univariate analyses; this kind of association persisted significant in mul-
tivariate analyses [39]. More importantly, emerging findings, including those 
recently provided by our group, support the concept that AR dilatation is an inde-
pendent predictor of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality [39, 40]. Of note, the 
association between LVH and AR dilatation in the participants of the PAMELA 
study resulted to be a stronger predictor of long-term cardiovascular outcomes than 
that entailed by LVH alone.
Literature data addressing the impact of prehypertension on aortic diameter are 
extremely limited and to the best of our current knowledge no study analyzed spe-
cifically this issue. Nevertheless, a couple of studies provided data on AR diameter, 
as part of the standard echocardiographic examination.
A gender-based analysis focusing on cardiac changes related to prehypertensive 
status carried out in a relatively small group of apparently healthy Indian subjects 
(n = 99; age range 25–65 years) showed that AR diameter was similar in normotensive 
and prehypertensive subjects of both sexes [41]. On the contrary, Li et al. [15] assess-
ing echocardiographic variables in large Chinese population-based sample, compris-
ing a total of 10,457 participants, found that AR increased progressively from 
normotensive (2.16 ± 0.25 cm), to prehypertensive (2.22 ± 0.31 cm) and to hyperten-
sive group (2.28 ± 0.27 cm). From this it is clear that further studies are needed to 
assess the association between prehypertension and the risk of AR dilatation.
 Conclusions
The relevance of systemic hypertension in the pathogenesis of LVH and other 
markers of subclinical cardiac damage is well established, and a large body of 
clinical studies has shown strong associations between LV mass and BP in a 
wide range of values ranging from mild to severe hypertension [42–44]. The 
present review highlights that cardiac organ damage can occur even in the pres-
ence of BP yet within the limits deemed clinically normal. It is worth noting that 
more robust data on the association between prehypertension and cardiac changes 
concern subtle but clinically significant increase in LV mass and impairment of 
diastolic function, whereas less information is available on LA and AR altera-
tions accompanying this BP phenotype. Finally, LV systolic function, as assessed 
by conventional echocardiographic indexes (i.e., LV ejection fraction) seems to 
be well preserved in prehypertension, although this conclusion has been recently 
challenged by the results of studies showing that LV mechanics assessed by 
three-dimensional echocardiography is significantly impaired in the subjects 
with high-normal BP. The increased risk of cardiac organ damage in prehyper -
tension is probably related to BP load, due to the continuous relationship between 
BP and LV mass. However, other factors seem to play a role in this complex 12 Heart and Prehypertension168
relationship. As compared to subjects with optimal BP, higher prevalence rates of 
masked hypertension, obesity, metabolic syndrome, unhealthy habits such as 
smoking, drinking, low physical activity have been described in prehypertensive 
subjects [45]. As widely documented, most of the cited factors may exert an 
unfavorable effect on cardiac structure and function.
In conclusion, the increased weight of evidence about the clinical and prog-
nostic significance of prehypertension (and this review underlines that subtle 
cardiac changes can occur before the onset of hypertension) emphasizes the need 
to intensify current preventive actions by extending them to subjects with 
prehypertension.
Acknowledgement  Disclosure: The authors report no conflicts of interest.
References
 1. Martinez MA, Sancho T, Armada E, Rubio JM, Antòn JL, Torre A, Palau J, Seguido P, Gallo 
J, Saenz I, Polo E, Torres R, Oliver J, Puig JG. Prevalence of left ventricular hypertrophy in 
patients with mild hypertension in primary care: impact of echocardiography on cardiovascu-
lar risk stratification. Am J Hypertens. 2003;16:556–63.
 2. de Moraes R, Tibirica E. Early functional and structural microvascular changes in hyperten-
sion related to aging. Curr Hypertens Rev. 2017;13:24–32.
 3. Vakili BA, Okin PM, Devereux RB. Prognostic implications of left ventricular hypertrophy. 
Am Heart J. 2001;141:334–41.
 4. Cuspidi C, Facchetti R, Bombelli M, Sala C, Tadic M, Grassi G, Mancia G. Prognostic value 
of left ventricular mass normalized to different body size indexes: findings from the PAMELA 
population. J Hypertens. 2015;33(5):1082–9.
 5. Mathiassen OM, Buus NH, Sihm I, Thybo NK, Morn B, Schroeder AP, Thygesen K, Aalkjaer 
C, Lederballe O, Mulvany MJ, Christensen KL. Small artery structure is an independent pre-
dictor of cardiovascular events in essential hypertension. J Hypertens. 2007;25:1021–6.
 6. Ruilope LM, Zanchetti A, Julius S, McInnes GT, Segura J, Stolt P, Hua TA, Weber MA, 
Jamerson K, V ALUE Investigators. Prediction of cardiovascular outcomes by estimated glo-
merular filtration rate and estimated creatinine clearance in the high-risk hypertension popula-
tion of the V ALUE trial. J Hypertens. 2007;25:1473–9.
 7. Ruilope LM, Schmieder RE. Left ventricular hypertrophy and clinical outcomes in hyperten-
sive patients. Am J Hypertens. 2008;21:500–6.
 8. Weber KT. Fibrosis and hypertensive heart disease. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2000;15:264–72.
 9. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, Peto R, Collins R. Age-specific relevance of usual blood 
pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 
prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360:1903–13.
 10. Huang Y , Wang S, Cai X, Mai W, Hu Y , Tang H, Xu D. Prehypertension and incidence of car -
diovascular disease: a meta-analysis. BMC Med. 2013;11:177.
 11. Moreno MU, Eiros R, Gavira JJ, Gallego C, González A, Ravassa S, López B, Beaumont J, 
San José G, Díez J. The hypertensive myocardium: from microscopic lesions to clinical com-
plications and outcomes. Med Clin North Am. 2017;101:43–52.
 12. Drukteinis JS, Roman MJ, Fabsitz RR, Lee ET, Best LG, Russell M, Devereux RB. Cardiac 
and systemic hemodynamic characteristics of hypertension and prehypertension in adolescents 
and young adults: the Strong Heart Study. Circulation. 2007;115:221–7.
 13. Ganau A, Devereux RB, Roman MJ, de Simone G, Pickering TG, Saba PS, Vargiu P, Simongini 
I, Laragh JH. Patterns of left ventricular hypertrophy and geometric remodeling in essential 
hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1992;19:1550–8.
C. Cuspidi et al.169
 14. Santos ABS, Gupta DK, Bello NA, Gori M, Claggett B, Fuchs FD, Shah AM, Coresh J, 
Sharrett AR, Cheng S, Solomon SD. Prehypertension is associated with abnormalities of car -
diac structure and function in the atherosclerosis risk in communities study. Am J Hypertens. 
2016;29:568–74.
 15. Li T, Yang J, Guo X, Chen S, Sun Y . Geometrical and functional changes of left heart in adults 
with prehypertension and hypertension: a cross-sectional study from China. BMC Cardiovasc 
Disord. 2016;16:114.
 16. Jung JY , Park SK, Oh CM, Kang JG, Choi JM, Ryoo JH, Lee JH. The influence of prehyper -
tension, controlled and uncontrolled hypertension on left ventricular diastolic function and 
structure in the general Korean population. Hypertens Res. 2017;40:606–12.
 17. Markus MR, Stritzke J, Lieb W, Mayer B, Luchner A, Döring A, Keil U, Hense HW, Schunkert 
H.  Implications of persistent prehypertension for ageing-related changes in left ventricular 
geometry and function: the MONICA/KORA Augsburg study. J Hypertens. 2008;26:2040–9.
 18. Pickering TG, Davidson K, Gerin W, Schwartz JE.  Masked hypertension. Hypertension. 
2002;40:795–6.
 19. Shimbo D, Newman JD, Schwartz JE. Masked hypertension and prehypertension: diagnostic 
overlap and interrelationship with left ventricular mass: the masked hypertension study. Am J 
Hypertens. 2012;25:664–71.
 20. Norton GR, Maseko M, Libhaber E, Libhaber CD, Majane OH, Dessein P, Sareli P, Woodiwiss 
AJ. Is prehypertension an independent predictor of target organ changes in young-to-middle-
aged persons of African descent ? J Hypertens. 2008;26:2279–87.
 21. Manios E, Tsivgoulis G, Koroboki E, Stamatelopoulos K, Papamichael C, Toumanidis S, 
Stamboulis E, Vemmos K, Zakopoulos N.  Impact of prehypertension on common carotid 
artery intima-media thickness and left ventricular mass. Stroke. 2009;40:1515–8.
 22. Mousa TM, Akinseye OA, Berekashvili K, Akinboboye OO. Correlation of prehypertension 
with left ventricular mass assessed by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. Int J Hypertens. 
2015;2015, Article ID 742658.
 23. Di Bello V , Talini E, Dell'Omo G, Giannini C, Delle Donne MG, Canale ML, Nardi C, Palagi 
C, Dini FL, Penno G, Del Prato S, Marzilli M, Pedrinelli R. Early left ventricular mechan-
ics abnormalities in prehypertension: a two-dimensional strain echocardiography study. Am J 
Hypertens. 2010;23:405–12.
 24. Tadic M, Majstorovic A, Pencic B, Ivanovic B, Neskovic A, Badano L, Stanisavljevic D, 
Scepanovic R, Stevanovic P, Celic V . The impact of high-normal blood pressure on left ven-
tricular mechanics: a three-dimensional and speckle tracking echocardiography study. Int J 
Cardiovasc Imaging. 2014;30:699–711.
 25. Lang RM, Badano LP, Mor-Avi V , Afilalo J, Armstrong A, Ernande L, Flachskampf FA, Foster 
E, Goldstein SA, Kuznetsova T, Lancellotti P, Muraru D, Picard MH, Rietzschel ER, Rudski 
L, Spencer KT, Tsang W, V oigt JU. Recommendations for cardiac chamber quantification by 
echocardiography in adults: an update from the American Society of Echocardiography and 
the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2015;28:1–39.
 26. Frohlich E, Gonzales A, Diez J. Hypertensive left ventricular hypertrophy risk: beyond adap-
tive cardiomyocytic hypertrophy. J Hypertens. 2011;29:17–26.
 27. Chahal NS, Kim TK, Jain P, Chambers JC, Kooner JS, Senior R. New insights into the relation-
ship of left ventricular geometry and left ventricular mass with cardiac function: a population 
study of hypertensive subjects. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:588–94.
 28. Zanchetti A, Cuspidi C, Comarella L, Agabiti-Rosei E, Ambrosioni E, Chiarello M, Leonetti 
G, Mancia G, Pessina AC, Salvetti A, Trimarco B, V olpe M, Grassivaro N, Vargiu G. Left 
ventricular diastolic dysfunction in elderly hypertensives: results of the APROS-diadys study. 
J Hypertens. 2007;25:2158–67.
 29. Urbina EM, Khoury PR, McCoy C, Daniels SR, Kimball TR, Dolan LM. Cardiac and vascular 
consequences of pre-hypertension in youth. J Clin Hypertens. 2011;13:332–42.
 30. Jang SY , Kim S, Lee CK, Cho EJ, Cho SJ, Lee SC. Prehypertension and left ventricular dia-
stolic dysfunction in middle-aged Koreans. Korean Circ J. 2016;46:536–41.
 31. Douglas P. The left atrium. A biomarker of chronic diastolic dysfunction and cardiovascular 
disease risk. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42:1206–7.12 Heart and Prehypertension170
 32. Tsioufis C, Stougiannos P, Taxiarchou E, Skiadas I, Chatzis D, Thomopoulos C, Lalos S, 
Stefanadis C, Kallikazaros I.  The interplay between hemodynamic load, brain natri-
uretic peptide and left atrial size in the early stages of essential hypertension. J Hypertens. 
2006;24:965–72.
 33. Benjamin EJ, D’Agostino RB, Belanger AJ, Wolf PA, Levy D. Left atrial size and the risk of 
stroke and death: the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 1995;92:835–41.
 34. Bombelli M, Facchetti R, Cuspidi C, Villa P, Dozio D, Brambilla G, Grassi G, Mancia 
G. Prognostic significance of left atrial enlargement in a general population: results of the 
PAMELA study. Hypertension. 2014;64:1205–11.
 35. Bombelli M, Cuspidi C, Facchetti R, Sala C, Tadic M, Brambilla G, Re A, Villa P, Grassi 
G, Mancia G.  New-onset left atrial enlargement in a general population. J Hypertens. 
2016;34:1838–45.
 36. Kim SH, Cho GY , Baik I, Lim SY , Choi CU, Lim HE, Kim EJ, Park CG, Park J, Kim J, 
Shin C. Early abnormalities of cardiovascular structure and function in middle-aged Korean 
adults with prehypertension: the Korean Genome Epidemiology study. Am J Hypertens. 
2011;24:218–24.
 37. Cipolli JA, Souza FAS, Ferreira-Sae MCS, Magalhaes JAP, Figueiredo ES, Vidotti VG, Matos-
Souza JR, Franchini KG, Nadruz W. Sex-specific hemodynamic and non-hemodynamic deter -
minants of aortic root size in hypertensive subjects with left ventricular hypertrophy. Hypertens 
Res. 2009;32:956–61.
 38. Covella M, Milan A, Totaro S, Cuspidi C, Re A, Rabbia F, Veglio F. Echocardiographic aortic 
root dilatation in hypertensive patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Hypertens. 
2014;32:1928–35.
 39. Gardin JM, Arnold AM, Polak J, Jackson S, Smith V , Gottdiener J. Usefulness of aortic root 
dimension in persons >65 years of age in predicting heart failure, stroke, cardiovascular mor -
tality, all-cause mortality and acute myocardial infarction (from the Cardiovascular Health 
Study). Am J Cardiol. 2006;97:270–5.
 40. Cuspidi C, Facchetti R, Bombelli M, Re A, Cairo M, Sala C, Tadic M, Grassi G, Mancia 
G. Aortic root diameter and risk of cardiovascular events in a general population: data from 
the PAMELA study. J Hypertens. 2014;32:1879–8.
 41. Bajpai JK, Sahay AP, Agarwal AK, De AK, Garg B, Goel A. Impact of prehypertension on left 
ventricular structure, function and geometry. J Clin Diagn Res. 2014;8:BC07–10.
 42. Mancia G, Carugo S, Grassi G, Lanzarotti A, Schiavina R, Cesana GC, Sega R. Prevalence of 
left ventricular hypertrophy in hypertensive patients without and with blood pressure control: 
data from the PAMELA population. Hypertension. 2002;39:744–9.
 43. Abdalla M, Booth JN, Diaz KM, Sims M, Muntner P, Shimbo D. Hypertension and alterations 
in left ventricular structure and geometry in African Americans: the Jackson Heart Study. J Am 
Soc Hypertens. 2016;10:550–8.
 44. Nakanishi K, Jin Z, Homma S, Elkind MSV , Rundek T Tugcu A, Sacco RL, Di Tullio 
MR. Association of blood pressure control level with left ventricular morphology and function 
and with subclinical cerebrovascular disease. J Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6(8):e006246.
 45. Guo X, Zou L, Zhang X, Li J, Zheng L, Sun Z, Hu J, Wong ND, Sun Y . Prehypertension : a 
meta-analysis of the epidemiology, risk factors, and predictors of progression. Tex Heart Inst 
J. 2011;38:643–52.
C. Cuspidi et al.171 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_13
P. W. de Leeuw ( *) 
Department of Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands 
Department of Medicine, Zuyderland Medical Center, Geleen/Heerlen, The Netherlands
e-mail: p.deleeuw@maastrichtuniversity.nl 
B. van Varik · D. J. L. van Twist 
Department of Medicine, Zuyderland Medical Center, Geleen/Heerlen, The Netherlands 
A. A. Kroon 
Department of Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands13Hemodynamics of Prehypertension
Peter W. de Leeuw, Barry van Varik, Daan J. L. van Twist, 
and Abraham A. Kroon
13.1  Introduction
Despite decades of intensive research, the etiology of essential hypertension remains 
unknown. Once this disorder has reached its established phase, it is characterized 
hemodynamically by an elevated peripheral vascular resistance and a normal or 
slightly reduced cardiac output [1]. In addition, vascular stiffness is increased which 
over time will result in a further rise in systolic pressure and vascular resistance. 
This creates a vicious cycle with, if left untreated, an ever-increasing blood pres-
sure. Other pathophysiological features that characterize the phase of established 
hypertension are reduced renal blood flow, increased filtration fraction, and a ten-
dency towards a lower plasma volume. Both the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) 
and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) have been implicated in 
these abnormalities but their precise role in the initiation and development of the 
hypertensive process has still not been fully clarified.
The elucidation of the pathogenetic processes leading to established hyperten-
sion requires that the factors responsible for the initiation of the disease be known. 
The ideal way of investigating these factors would be to follow-up normotensive 
individuals up to the point where they become hypertensive. For obvious reasons, 
such studies are not feasible, not the least because one would not know who will 
become hypertensive and who not. In fact, many if not most of them may never 172
develop hypertension at all. Alternatively, one could study the offspring of 
 hypertensive patients and compare this offspring to that of normotensive parents. In 
doing so, one enriches the population with people who are likely to develop hyper -
tension at some point in their life. This type of approach has been repeatedly applied, 
but again it is uncertain whether children from hypertensive parents will, indeed, 
ever become hypertensive. In addition, one runs the risk of mixing up true genetic 
influences with familial ones such as environment and diet.
Finally, one could attempt to investigate individuals who are already somewhere 
on their way from the normotensive to the hypertensive state. Again, this is not an 
easy category to study but it comprises the people who could be labeled as being 
prehypertensive. It seems that this group of patients is not too dissimilar from that 
which was designated in the past with such terms as “labile hypertension” or “bor -
derline hypertension.” The term “labile hypertension” has been largely abandoned 
because, in fact, nearly all patients with hypertension have some degree of lability 
of their blood pressure. Borderline hypertensives are people who sometimes cross 
the line of normality in terms of blood pressure but who at other times are com-
pletely normotensive. According to a much-used definition it is a condition in 
which blood pressure is sometimes below but more often above the arbitrary 
140/90 mmHg cutoff point that separates normotension from hypertension. One 
would think, therefore, that this is a transitory state in which an individual gradu-
ally moves from being truly normotensive to being truly hypertensive. As such, one 
could label this state also as prehypertension although it is not entirely the same. 
Prehypertension was defined in the Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee 
(JNC-7) as a blood pressure, based on the average of two or more properly mea-
sured, seated, readings on each of two or more office visits from 120 to 139 mmHg 
systolic or from 80 to 89 mmHg diastolic [2 ]. Thus, an evolutionary scheme could 
be: true normotension-prehypertension-borderline hypertension-true hypertension. 
Admittedly, we do not know with certainty whether people go, indeed, through 
these stages of prehypertension and borderline hypertension and in the past border -
line hypertension has often been considered as an “illness” in its own right. Still, 
data from the Framingham study suggest that a normal or high-normal blood pres-
sure frequently progresses to full hypertension [3 ] and that this is associated with 
an increased cardiovascular risk [4 ]. So, until there is firm evidence to the contrary, 
we do best to consider prehypertension and borderline hypertension as, presum-
ably transient, phases in the hypertensive process.
13.2  Systemic Hemodynamics in Borderline Hypertension
Blood pressure (BP), in hemodynamic terms, is determined by cardiac output (CO) 
and total peripheral resistance (TPR) according to the formula: BP  =  CO  ×  TPR.  Whether 
the very early phases of hypertension are related to a rise in vascular resistance or in 
cardiac output or both has for years been a matter of vigorous debate. Initially, the 
hemodynamic studies focused primarily on young, borderline hypertensives. Most of 
these studies found that cardiac output, when corrected for body size and expressed 
P. W. de Leeuw et al.173
as cardiac index (L/m2), as well as heart rate is increased by about 15% in border -
line hypertensives as compared to matched normotensives [5 , 6]. Since cardiac 
output is the product of heart rate and stroke volume, in theory both components 
could be involved. However, it turns out that the rise in cardiac output in borderline 
hypertensives is mainly due to an elevated heart rate and far less to alterations in 
stroke volume. In a series of elegant experiments, Julius and coworkers have shown 
that both enhanced sympathetic and reduced parasympathetic activity can be held 
accountable for the “hyperkinetic” heart [7 ]. These investigators found that heart 
rate became normal after total autonomic blockade with propranolol and atropine 
combined (but not after any one of these alone) which suggests that the pacemaker 
by itself acts normally but that it is rendered overactive by neurogenic influences. 
The same researchers also found stroke volume index to be slightly increased but 
several other studies failed to find a difference in this variable between normoten-
sives and borderline hypertensives. Overall, therefore, the case for a hyperkinetic 
heart in borderline hypertension seems to be stronger with respect to frequency 
than to stroke volume. It must be emphasized, though, that in virtually all publica-
tions only mean values are presented for the hemodynamic data. Nevertheless, 
interindividual variations were substantial and true increases are apparent in only 
about one-third of the patients [6 ]. Finally, total peripheral resistance was, on aver -
age, increased in the group with borderline hypertension. Even though resistance 
was numerically normal in those with a hyperkinetic heart, it was inappropriately 
high for the degree of systemic flow. Therefore, it is safe to conclude that border -
line hypertension, if we consider this to be an early phase of hypertension, is char -
acterized by an augmented vascular resistance either with or without a hyperkinetic 
heart.
13.3  Systemic Hemodynamics in Prehypertension
If we want to try to catch potential hemodynamic abnormalities in even earlier 
phases of the hypertensive process, it is worthwhile to explore systemic hemody-
namics in individuals with prehypertension. This has been done, for instance, in the 
Strong Heart Study which is a population-based survey of cardiovascular risk fac-
tors and cardiovascular disease in several American Indian communities [8]. At the 
fourth follow-up examination of this study, Drukteinis and coworkers recruited 
1940 participants below 40 years of age (average age 27 years) of whom 971 were 
normotensive, 294 were hypertensive, and 675 fulfilled the criteria of prehyperten-
sion (35%). In all these participants, echocardiographic measurements were 
obtained to estimate cardiac mass and performance. Compared to normotensives, 
heart rate and cardiac output were significantly higher in the prehypertensives. 
However, cardiac index did not differ between groups and averaged 2.67 and 
2.73 mL/min m2, respectively, in the normotensives and prehypertensives (Fig.  13.1). 
These numbers are notably lower than those registered in earlier studies in border -
line hypertension [6]. Of note, in the prehypertension group more people were 
obese and/or had diabetes or impaired glucose tolerance. However, adjustment for 13 Hemodynamics of Prehypertension174
these confounders did not change the results. Total peripheral resistance index was 
higher in prehypertension and so was the pulse pressure/stroke index quotient. The 
latter can be considered as a proxy for arterial stiffness, which apparently is already 
increased in prehypertension as well. In addition, the prehypertensive group showed 
a greater left ventricular mass and more often frank left ventricular hypertrophy. 
Incidentally, besides a higher systolic pressure, the presence of left ventricular 
hypertrophy also appeared to be a predictor of further progression from prehyper -
tension to hypertension [9].
Almost at the same time, Zhu and coworkers reported on their findings in an 
even younger group (average age 17 years) with prehypertension [10]. In white 
prehypertensives, these investigators also found a higher heart rate and total periph-
eral resistance together with a normal cardiac index (measured with impedance 
cardiography), which is in line with the data from the Strong Heart Study. However, 
in blacks they found the opposite hemodynamic pattern, i.e., a higher cardiac index 
but a normal heart rate and total peripheral resistance. Again, the latter still is inap-
propriately high in relation to the prevailing level of cardiac output because resis-
tance should have fallen in the face of the high systemic flow (Fig.  13.2). Another 
race-related feature was arterial stiffness which was greater in white prehyperten-
sives compared to white normotensives but not different between the two blood 
pressure groups in blacks.Hear t rate
p < 0.00190
80
70
60beats/minute
50
20001.01.5mmHg/mL per m2AU per m22.0
2500300035004000012L/min per m234
NT PHT
TPR PP/SIHT
NT PHT HTNT PHTH TNT PHTH Tp = 0.02
p < 0.001p < 0.001
p < 0.001p < 0.001n.s.Cardiac inde x
Fig. 13.1 Systemic hemodynamics in normotension (NT), prehypertension (PHT), and hyperten-
sion (HT). Adapted from the Strong Heart Study [8]
P. W. de Leeuw et al.175
A little later, Davis and associates published their results with respect to the auto-
nomic and hemodynamic origins of prehypertension [11]. They obtained their data 
from the UCSD twin/family study and compared 340 prehypertensives with 337 nor -
motensives of comparable age. For the hemodynamic measurements, an oscillomet-
ric device was used which collects several cardiac and vascular functional data. Also 
in this study, mean heart rate and cardiac output were significantly higher in the 
prehypertensive group and so was stroke volume. Remarkably, when normalized for 
body surface area the differences persisted. Total peripheral resistance was numeri-
cally similar in the two groups but one could argue that this was still inappropriately 
elevated for the height of cardiac output in the prehypertensives (Fig.  13.2). Other 
striking findings in the prehypertensives included enhanced cardiac contractility, a 
wider pulse pressure and reduced brachial artery distensibility and systemic vascular 
compliance, which is indicative for an increased vascular stiffness.
Finally, Pal and colleagues studied a group of 118 normotensives and 58 prehy-
pertensives of approximately 20 years of age and found both cardiac output and 
total peripheral vascular resistance to be significantly higher in the latter [12]. 
Although body mass index was substantially higher in the prehypertensives, the 
authors failed to normalize their hemodynamic data. Thus, we do not know whether 
the increase in cardiac output was also elevated in relation to body surface area or 
not. But regardless of cardiac index, their data also point to at least an increase in 
vascular resistance.2000 2500 30002.02.53.03.54.0
TPRI (AU)CI (L/min per m2)HT
NTPHTZhu (whites)
De LeeuwStrong Heart Study
Zhu (blacks)
Davis120/80 mmHg 140/90 mmH g
Fig. 13.2 Balance between cardiac index (CI = cardiac output normalized for body surface area) 
and total peripheral resistance index (TPRI = resistance indexed for body surface area) in normo-
tensives (NT), prehypertensives (PHT), and hypertensives (HT). The “isobars” indicating the lines 
for a pressure of 120/80 mmHg and 140/90 mmHg mark the boundaries between prehypertension 
and normotension and between prehypertension and hypertension, respectively. Note that in pre-
hypertensives even a high cardiac output is already associated with an inappropriately elevated 
vascular resistance. Data derived from Drukteinis et al. [8], Zhu et al. [10], Davis et al. [11], and 
De Leeuw et al. [13]13 Hemodynamics of Prehypertension176
In our own laboratory, we have studied a small group of young, male medical 
students who at one time had proven to be hypertensive, but later had blood 
pressures in the prehypertensive range [13]. They were compared to another 
group of young individuals, who were normotensive all the time. In each one of 
them we recorded blood pressure and noninvasively determined cardiac output 
and left ventricular ejection time by means of impedance cardiography. 
Importantly, all participants were put on a mildly sodium-restricted diet to avoid 
salt-dependent interindividual variations. In our hands, there were no differ -
ences in heart rate, stroke volume, cardiac output, and left ventricular ejection 
time between the two groups. Total peripheral vascular resistance, however, was 
significantly higher in the prehypertensives. Moreover, the pulse pressure over 
stroke index ratio as a proxy for systemic arterial stiffness was increased as well 
in these prehypertensives.
Taken together, the results of the various studies using different populations and 
different methodology are rather consistent in the sense that they suggest that even 
in prehypertension the peripheral vasculature is the main source of the elevated 
pressure. Moreover, an increase in vascular stiffness is a uniform finding [8, 10–15]. 
Undoubtedly, abnormalities in the microcirculation contribute to enhanced vascular 
stiffness on the one hand and an increased burden to the heart on the other.
13.4  Comparison with Established Hypertension
As little information there is concerning hemodynamics in prehypertension, as 
much is there about hemodynamic patterns in patients with established hyperten-
sion [6]. There is general agreement that in those in whom hypertension is still 
uncomplicated, the elevated pressure is maintained by an increased total peripheral 
resistance. By and large, heart rate remains higher in the hypertensives as well, but 
cardiac output is either normal or only slightly reduced.
In the Strong Heart Study, prehypertensives were not only compared to normo-
tensives but also to hypertensives with respect to their hemodynamic indices [8]. 
These data also show that heart rate was significantly higher in the hypertensives 
while cardiac index was similar. Total peripheral vascular resistance, when indexed 
for body surface area, was significantly greater in the hypertensives as well. The 
pulse pressure to stroke index ratio, as proxy for vascular stiffness, was clearly 
greater in the hypertensives compared to the normotensives with the prehyperten-
sives taking an intermediate position.
In their twin study, Davis and coworkers found significant trends across their 
groups of normotensives, prehypertensives, and hypertensives with respect to heart 
rate, cardiac index, pulse pressure, and vascular stiffness [11]. These were all lowest 
in the normotensives and highest in the hypertensives. The opposite trend was seen 
for brachial artery distensibility which was lowest in the hypertensives. Except for 
pulse pressure, however, post hoc analysis failed to find statistical differences in any 
of these variables between the prehypertensives and the hypertensives. Total periph-
eral vascular resistance was not different across or between the three groups.
P. W. de Leeuw et al.177
Even though conventional significance levels were not reached in most of the 
post hoc analyses, the trends are clearly in agreement with the data from the Strong 
Heart Study in that the “transition” from prehypertension to frank hypertension is 
associated with an invariably increased heart rate, no or only small changes in car -
diac output, and a further rise in arterial stiffness. In numerical terms, vascular resis-
tance may remain unaltered but even then, it signifies an inability to vasodilate 
properly in response to a normal or enhanced systemic flow.
In our own study on the medical students, we also compared the prehyperten-
sives to a group of matched hypertensives (unpublished data). The latter had a lower 
cardiac index and a higher vascular resistance and stiffness, without any difference 
in heart rate. Regarding the vascular abnormalities, therefore, these data also tally 
well with the previous ones.
13.5  Regional Hemodynamics
Total peripheral resistance is the sum of the resistances (calculated as for parallel 
circuits) in the various organs of the body. The magnitude of resistance to blood 
flow in any single organ determines which fraction of the cardiac output will be 
directed to it. Thus, if we would be able to simultaneously measure cardiac output 
and regional flows we could explore whether the rise in total resistance is a general-
ized phenomenon or preferentially occurs in specific organs. A rise in resistance 
occurs in all vascular beds that have been studied in hypertensives but it is particu-
larly striking in that of the kidney [16]. Renal fraction, which is the proportion of 
cardiac output that flows through the kidneys, falls with age in hypertensives, indi-
cating that the degree of vasoconstriction in the kidney becomes progressively 
greater than the rise in resistance elsewhere in the body. However, it is impossible 
to tell whether this preferential renal vasoconstriction is the cause or the conse-
quence of a higher blood pressure.
Even in this established phase of the hypertensive process glomerular filtration 
rate is well maintained for a long time so that filtration fraction which is defined 
as glomerular filtration rate as a percentage of the renal plasma flow gradually 
rises with the increase in renal vascular resistance. This suggests that the postglo-
merular resistance increases faster or more than preglomerular resistance. Only 
when the delivery of blood to the kidneys becomes severely compromised, filtra-
tion will fall. Although these pathophysiological features have been well described 
for established hypertension, only limited information is available with respect to 
the early phases of hypertension. If we turn again to borderline hypertension, the 
data from Messerli and coworkers on the renal and the splanchnic vascular beds 
are of relevance. These investigators studied 41 patients with borderline hyperten-
sion who were subdivided in groups with low, normal, or high cardiac output [17]. 
Except for cardiac output they also measured renal and splanchnic blood flow by 
means of radio-iodinated PAH and indocyanine green clearance, respectively. 
Both renal and splanchnic blood flow correlated significantly with cardiac output 
indicating that, at least in this patient population, the fractional distribution of 13 Hemodynamics of Prehypertension178
systemic flow to the kidneys and the splanchnic organs remains unaltered. In other 
words, the observed increase in vascular resistance at this stage is generalized and 
not preferential in, for instance, the kidneys. In a later study, Messerli’s group 
explored the relationship of renal blood flow and cardiac output with age in nor -
motensives and in borderline hypertensives [18]. In both groups, they found a 
parallel decline in systemic and renal flow with ageing. In other words, at any age 
the distribution of cardiac output over the kidneys and probably other organs is 
comparable in normotensives and borderline hypertensives. Thus, if there is no 
sustained hypertension, there is no preferential vasoconstriction in the renal 
vasculature.
Although a few studies have addressed regional flow patterns in prehypertension, 
no such data exist in combination with estimations of cardiac output except those 
from our own study in the medical students. In those, renal fraction was not differ -
ent either between the normotensives and the prehypertensives and, if anything, 
even slightly higher in the latter (22 vs. 20%). Renal vascular resistance in the pre-
hypertensives was numerically comparable to that in normotensives, but given the 
slightly higher blood pressure in the former, one could still consider this as being 
too high.
Despite the increase in renal vascular resistance, perfusion of the kidneys was 
even somewhat greater in the prehypertensive students than in their normotensive 
counterparts. Such a pattern of relative “overperfusion” has been seen in other stud-
ies as well and seems to “affect” about one-third of young people in their early 
stages of hypertension [19, 20]. The reason for the increased flow rate is not clear 
but may involve a mechanism to protect the glomeruli. Indeed, when glomerular 
filtration rate remains intact for a very long time despite a progressive decline in 
renal plasma flow, this will lead to an increased filtration fraction just as in patients 
with established hypertension. It is thought that a rise in postglomerular resistance 
is necessary to maintain filtration in the face of an enhanced preglomerular resis-
tance but this may also expose some glomeruli to the detrimental effect of an aug-
mented intraglomerular pressure. If the kidney now recruits dormant nephrons and 
increases total flow in order to perfuse these recruited nephrons, the filtration pro-
cess can be divided over a greater surface area without the necessity to raise pres-
sure in these glomeruli. This hypothetical sequence of events, however, needs to be 
confirmed in proper experiments.
As for other organs, there is a study from Turkey in 40 individuals with prehyper -
tension and 50 healthy volunteers who underwent transthoracic Doppler echocar -
diography to assess cardiac dimensions and coronary flow reserve (CFR) [21]. The 
two groups did not differ with respect to left ventricular mass and heart rate but CFR 
was significantly lower in the prehypertension group. Although these data point 
towards an increased resistance in the coronary vascular bed of prehypertensives, it 
is impossible to know whether this increase is proportional to that of systemic vas-
cular resistance.
Finally, Italian investigators have shown that in people with prehypertension fre-
quently abnormalities of the retinal circulation are found, including arteriolar nar -
rowing and, consequently, a reduced arteriolar-to-venular ratio [22].
P. W. de Leeuw et al.179
13.6  Follow-up Studies
All of the data described above have been obtained in cross-sectional studies which 
have only limited value for our understanding of the natural evolution of the hyper -
tensive process. Thus, longitudinal studies are indispensable to explore how hemody-
namics change over time. By far the most informative (and only) long-term study in 
this regard is that of Lund-Johansson [6 ]. This investigator has followed a group of 
young hypertensive individuals and age-matched normotensive controls for a period 
of 20 years with similar invasive hemodynamic measurements after 10 and 20 years. 
Although the hypertensives had slightly elevated blood pressures which precluded a 
diagnosis of borderline hypertension, they could be considered to be in a very early 
phase of hypertension that still did not require treatment. At the start of the study, 
heart rate and cardiac index were about 15% higher in the hypertensives who were 
then 17–29 years of age. After 10 years, blood pressure had changed remarkably lit-
tle. Nevertheless, total peripheral resistance had increased significantly, while car -
diac index and stroke volume index had fallen. Compared to the normotensives, heart 
rate remained elevated. During the following 10 years, all these changes progressed 
so that at the 20-year follow-up evaluation cardiac performance was even lower and 
vascular resistance higher with only minor changes in heart rate.
In our laboratory, we performed repeat examinations of systemic and renal hemo-
dynamics in the prehypertensive group of medical students as well as in the matched 
hypertensives after 2 years of follow-up [13]. During this time only the hypertensive 
participants received antihypertensive medication which was discontinued prior to 
the measurements. Although cardiac output and stroke volume showed a tendency to 
fall over the two-year period in the prehypertensives, the differences were not statisti-
cally significant. The same was true for total peripheral resistance which tended to 
rise slightly. Heart rate did not change and arterial stiffness remained invariably 
increased. In the hypertensives, cardiac output fell to a greater extent, together with 
a rise in resistance and arterial stiffness. Renal blood flow fell slightly in both the 
prehypertensives and the hypertensives with a rise in renal vascular resistance that 
was proportional to that in systemic resistance in both groups.
13.7  Pathophysiological Considerations
According to the classical concept of whole-body autoregulation an increased car -
diac output will elicit a vasoconstrictor response to prevent overperfusion of tissues 
and a disturbance of homeostasis [23]. This, in turn, will bring back cardiac output to 
its original level but at the expense of a raised vascular resistance and, hence, an 
increased blood pressure. It has long been thought that this sequence of events, which 
was based on observations in experimental animals, would be applicable to hyperten-
sive humans as well. Many of the hemodynamic observations that have been obtained 
in patients in different stages of their hypertension do, indeed, suggest that also in 
man hypertension evolves from a high-output, normal resistance state into a low-
output, high-resistance state. The high-output state at the early phase of hypertension 13 Hemodynamics of Prehypertension180
or during the period of prehypertension is often explained by enhanced sympathetic 
activity or altered volume homeostasis. The increase in resistance over time is then 
seen as the equivalent of the whole-body autoregulation mechanism. There are, how-
ever, several arguments against the hypothesis of this hemodynamic transition. First, 
a high-output state does not necessarily lead to an increased resistance or to hyper -
tension. Clinical examples include severe anemia, hyperthyroidism, arteriovenous 
anastomoses as in Paget’s disease, beri-beri, and Gorlin’s syndrome. These are all 
conditions in which cardiac output may sometimes be extremely high, yet is not fol-
lowed by a (progressive) rise in vascular resistance. Secondly, an autoregulatory 
vasoconstrictor response occurs only when tissue perfusion exceeds metabolic 
demands (so-called luxury perfusion) but this does not occur in humans [6 ]. Indeed, 
the rise in cardiac output is entirely proportional to oxygen consumption. Thirdly, not 
all patients with borderline hypertension or prehypertension have an increased car -
diac output. Thus, a hyperkinetic circulation is not at all a prerequisite to develop 
sustained hypertension. Finally, there are patients with high-output borderline hyper -
tension or prehypertension who will never progress to the state of hypertension and 
sometimes may even “regress” again to normotension.
As a matter of fact, there is no need to invoke a cardiac driver of hypertension if 
we focus more on vascular resistance itself. As already outlined above, even a 
numerically normal vascular resistance is still elevated in the face of the prevailing 
level of cardiac output, regardless of whether output is increased or not. With a 
high systemic flow that is appropriate in relation to tissue demands, the normal 
response would be peripheral vasodilation to prevent a rise in blood pressure. Thus, 
effectively all hemodynamic studies point to a disturbance of vasoregulation, even 
in the very early stages of hypertension or prehypertension. If we accept the fact 
that hypertension always starts as an abnormal vasoconstrictor state (from what-
ever cause), we could see an increased variability of blood pressure and cardiac 
output just as secondary phenomena. Whether cardiac output will be normal or 
high will then depend on what “force” is needed for adequate tissue perfusion.
Collectively, the available data strongly suggest that in prehypertension and bor -
derline hypertension or, for that matter, the early stages of hypertension there is no 
preferential increase in vascular resistance in any specific organ and certainly not in 
the kidney. This renders an initiating role of (relative) renal ischemia as the cause of 
hypertension less likely. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to elaborate on the 
possible causes of the abnormal resistance but likely genetic, endothelial, and neu-
rohumoral factors will play an important role. Whatever mechanisms are involved, 
any theory on the pathogenesis of hypertension must account for this generalized, 
hence non-localized, increase in resistance.
 Conclusions
If we try to reconcile the findings described above in a hypothetical scheme 
concerning the development of hypertension, it is likely that the transition from 
normotension to established hypertension may first go through a phase of pre-
hypertension and then borderline hypertension. Likely, the duration of these 
phases is variable and unpredictable with some people progressing very fast 
P. W. de Leeuw et al.181
and others staying in one of these phases for a long time with perhaps even a 
return to normal pressures. The general increase in resistance as seen in prehy-
pertension causes only a minor rise in blood pressure which is maintained 
because cardiac output cannot fall because of the metabolic demands. In prin-
ciple, this phase can last for a long time. On the long run, systemic resistance 
probably further increases due to (inappropriate) vascular remodeling, i.e., 
increased vascular stiffness, resulting in propagation to borderline and estab-
lished hypertension. Perhaps it is only when the renal fraction falls and the 
kidney gets jeopardized that the transition to full-blown hypertension is set in 
motion with the kidney now probably taking on a culprit role. While these are 
hypothetical thoughts, they may form a good starting point for future hemody-
namic studies in prehypertension and hypertension.
References
 1. Birkenhäger WH, De Leeuw PW, Schalekamp MADH.  Control mechanisms in essential 
hypertension. Amsterdam: Elsevier Biomedical Press; 1982.
 2. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, et al. The seventh 
report of the joint National Committee on prevention, detection, evaluation, and treatment of 
high blood pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003;289(19):2560–72.
 3. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, Kannel WB, Levy D. Assessment of frequency of progression 
to hypertension in non-hypertensive participants in the Framingham Heart Study: a cohort 
study. Lancet. 2001;358(9294):1682–6.
 4. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, Evans JC, O’Donnell CJ, Kannel WB, et al. Impact of high-nor -
mal blood pressure on the risk of cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(18):1291–7.
 5. Birkenhager WH. A critical interpretation of juvenile borderline hypertension. J Hypertens. 
1991;9(Suppl 6):S2–9.
 6. Omvik P, Lund-Johansen P. Hemodynamics of hypertension. In: Mancia G, Grassi G, Redon J, 
editors. Manual of hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension. 2nd ed. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press; 2014. p. 101–14.
 7. Julius S, Esler M. Autonomic nervous cardiovascular regulation in borderline hypertension. 
Am J Cardiol. 1975;36(5):685–96.
 8. Drukteinis JS, Roman MJ, Fabsitz RR, Lee ET, Best LG, Russell M, et al. Cardiac and sys-
temic hemodynamic characteristics of hypertension and prehypertension in adolescents and 
young adults: the Strong Heart Study. Circulation. 2007;115(2):221–7.
 9. De Marco M, de Simone G, Roman MJ, Chinali M, Lee ET, Russell M, et al. Cardiovascular 
and metabolic predictors of progression of prehypertension into hypertension: the Strong 
Heart Study. Hypertension. 2009;54(5):974–80.
 10. Zhu H, Yan W, Ge D, Treiber FA, Harshfield GA, Kapuku G, et al. Cardiovascular characteris-
tics in American youth with prehypertension. Am J Hypertens. 2007;20(10):1051–7.
 11. Davis JT, Rao F, Naqshbandi D, Fung MM, Zhang K, Schork AJ, et  al. Autonomic and 
hemodynamic origins of pre-hypertension: central role of heredity. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;59(24):2206–16.
 12. Pal GK, Adithan C, Ananthanarayanan PH, Pal P, Nanda N, Thiyagarajan D, et al. Association 
of sympathovagal imbalance with cardiovascular risks in young prehypertensives. Am J 
Cardiol. 2013;112(11):1757–62.
 13. De Leeuw PW, Kho TL, Birkenhäger WH. Pathophysiologic features of hypertension in young 
men. Chest. 1983;83(2 Suppl):312–4.13 Hemodynamics of Prehypertension182
 14. Gedikli O, Kiris A, Ozturk S, Baltaci D, Karaman K, Durmus I, et al. Effects of prehyperten-
sion on arterial stiffness and wave reflections. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2010;32(2):84–9.
 15. Davis JT, Pasha DN, Khandrika S, Fung MM, Milic M, O'Connor DT. Central hemodynam-
ics in prehypertension: effect of the beta-adrenergic antagonist nebivolol. J Clin Hypertens 
(Greenwich). 2013;15(1):69–74.
 16. Birkenhäger WH, De Leeuw PW, Derkx FHM. The kidney in hypertension-background and 
practical implications. Hypertens Res. 1993;16(1):3–15.
 17. Messerli FH, De Carvalho JG, Christie B, Frohlich ED. Systemic and regional hemodynam-
ics in low, normal and high cardiac output borderline hypertension. Circulation. 1978;58(3 Pt 
1):441–8.
 18. Schmieder RE, Schachinger H, Messerli FH. Accelerated decline in renal perfusion with aging 
in essential hypertension. Hypertension. 1994;23(3):351–7.
 19. Bianchi G, Cusi D, Gatti M, Lupi GP, Ferrari P, Barlassina C, et al. A renal abnormality as a 
possible cause of “essential” hypertension. Lancet. 1979;1(8109):173–7.
 20. Hollenberg NK, Borucki LJ, Adams DF. The renal vasculature in early essential hypertension: 
evidence for a pathogenetic role. Medicine (Baltimore). 1978;57(2):167–78.
 21. Erdogan D, Yildirim I, Ciftci O, Ozer I, Caliskan M, Gullu H, et al. Effects of normal blood 
pressure, prehypertension, and hypertension on coronary microvascular function. Circulation. 
2007;115(5):593–9.
 22. Grassi G, Buzzi S, Dell'Oro R, Mineo C, Dimitriadis K, Seravalle G, et al. Structural altera-
tions of the retinal microcirculation in the “prehypertensive” high-normal blood pressure state. 
Curr Pharm Des. 2013;19(13):2375–81.
 23. Guyton A. Arterial pressure and hypertension. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company; 1980.
P. W. de Leeuw et al.183 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_14
D. Rizzoni ( *) 
Clinica Medica, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy 
Division of Medicine, Istituto Clinico Città di Brescia, Brescia, Italy
e-mail: damiano.rizzoni@unibs.it 
C. De Ciuceis · E. Porteri · E. Agabiti-Rosei · C. Agabiti-Rosei 
Clinica Medica, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy14Microvascular Structural Alterations 
and Tissue Perfusion in Hypertension/
Diabetes
Damiano Rizzoni, Carolina De Ciuceis, Enzo Porteri, 
Enrico Agabiti-Rosei, and Claudia Agabiti-Rosei
14.1  Microvascular Structure in Hypertension
Resistance arteries are key elements in the control of blood pressure. The main drop 
in hydrostatic pressure occurs at the level of the resistance vasculature: i.e. small 
resistance arteries (<350  μm of lumen diameter), arterioles (<100  μm of lumen 
diameter) and capillaries (about 7  μm of lumen diameter) [1, 2]. Total peripheral 
resistance in terminal arteries and arterioles amounts to 45–50%, in capillaries to 
23–30%, in venules to 3–4%, and to 3% in veins [2]. Thus, structural changes in the 
microcirculation may directly and strongly affect blood pressure values. In fact, it is 
now widely accepted that structural abnormalities of microvessels are common 
alterations associated with chronic hypertension [1, 3–5]. A thickened arterial wall 
together with a reduced lumen (a process known as remodelling) may play an 
important role in the increase of vascular resistance, and may also be an adaptive 
response to the increased haemodynamic load. As described by Poiseuille’s law, 
resistance is inversely proportional to the radius to the forth power; therefore, slight 
alterations in arterial lumen result in significant effects on vascular resistance. In 
addition, hypertension seems to be associated with a reduction (rarefaction) in the 
number of capillaries [6–8].
In the last few years, several evidences have suggested that hypertensive injury 
of small arteries may participate also in the pathophysiology of its complications. 184
Hence, the study of structural alterations of resistance vessels in essential hyperten-
sion, the possibility of their regression with antihypertensive treatment as well as 
their contribution to the prognosis of patients with essential hypertension should be 
considered of great clinical and scientific interest.
14.2  Microvascular Structure in Diabetes Mellitus
Microvascular complications are major contributors to morbidity, mortality and 
costs of both non-insulin-dependent (NIDDM) and insulin-dependent diabetes mel-
litus (IDDM) [9]. Damage of the small vessels in the kidney can lead to end-stage 
renal disease, structural alterations of the smaller vessels that supply nutrients and 
oxygen to peripheral nerves contribute to neuropathy while damage of the micro-
vasculature of the eye is the leading cause of loss of vision in working-age adults. 
The clinical manifestations of microvascular disease are so characteristic of the 
disease that diabetes itself is defined primarily by the level of hyperglycaemia which 
causes microvascular complications.
Alterations in the microcirculation involve small resistance arteries, arterioles, 
capillaries and post capillary venules. A relevant role in the impairment of vascular 
distensibility may be played by advanced glycosylation end products (AGE), 
which may be involved in the formation of collagen cross-links [10]. While there 
is a huge number of data about microangiopathy (capillary and arterioles), quite 
few data about morphology of small resistance arteries (diameter ranging from 100 
to 350  μm) in diabetes mellitus are presently available. In one study [11], no differ -
ence in subcutaneous small artery structure was observed between control subjects 
and patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM). On the contrary, it 
has been demonstrated that, in both hypertensive and normotensive patients with 
NIDDM, marked alterations in small artery structure are present [12], and that 
these alterations are more pronounced in hypertensive patients with NIDDM than 
in patients with essential hypertension or in normotensive diabetics (Fig.  14.1) 
[12]. In addition, in diabetic patients a clear increase in the media cross-sectional 
area of the vessels was observed, thus suggesting the presence of hypertrophic 
remodelling (vascular smooth muscle cells hypertrophy or hyperplasia) [12, 13] 
(Fig.  14.1). This was not the case of patients with essential hypertension. A weak, 
but significant correlation between circulating levels of insulin and media-to-lumen 
ratio of subcutaneous small arteries was observed in diabetic patients, thus sug-
gesting a possible role of insulin or insulin-like growth factor-1 in the genesis of 
hypertrophic remodelling in these patients [12] However, an alternative explana-
tion for the presence of hypertrophic remodelling in these vessels has been pro-
posed [13]. In fact, a possible stimulus for hypertrophic remodelling could be the 
increased wall stress, as a consequence of the impaired myogenic response. 
Myogenic response is a pressure-induced vasoconstriction, which is the key com-
ponent of blood flow autoregulation and stabilization of capillary pressure. The 
observation by Schofield et al. [13] of the lack of such a myogenic response in 
diabetic patients may therefore be responsible for the development of hypertrophic 
D. Rizzoni et al.185
remodelling of small arteries (Fig.  14.2) [13]. As mentioned, while small resis-
tance arteries and arterioles may undergo a remodelling process and fibrosis in 
pathological conditions, capillaries may undergo a functional or structural rarefac-
tion, with consequent reduction in the density per area units of tissue. This process 
of vascular rarefaction was previously observed in patients with hypertension [7 , 8] 
but also in patients with NIDDM [14, 15].
On the contrary, in other vascular districts such as the retina, microvascular pro-
liferation may also be observed. In fact, diabetic retinopathy results either from 
capillary leakage or from new vessel formation (neovascularization, angiogenesis), 
caused by capillary closure and retinal ischaemia. The capillaries leak lipid products 
and fluid in the area around the fovea and thicken the retina, which may lead to 
macular oedema. Angiogenesis is the result of retinal ischaemia, and retinal haem-
orrhages are the consequence of the fragility of neovessels. The haemorrhage can 
enter the vitreous and cause sudden loss of vision. Several mechanisms and meta-
bolic abnormalities, acting alone or in concert with each other, may lead to capillary 
death, leakage and occlusion and to the release of growth factors, finally resulting in 
new vessel formation and increase vascular permeability. A relevant role is played 
by vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Whereas VEGF is involved in 
NT
 HT NIDDM NIDDM and HT
03691215M/L ratio
*********#
500010000150002000025000(*) *
µm2Media cross-sectional area
Fig. 14.1 Subcutaneous small resistance arteries structure in hypertensive and diabetic patients. 
Left: Media-to-lumen ratio in subcutaneous small resistance arteries from normotensive subjects 
(NT), essential hypertensive patients (HT), normotensive patients with non-insulin-dependent dia-
betes mellitus (NIDDM) and hypertensive patients with NIDDM (NIDDM and HT). A clear 
increase may be observed in all the three pathologic groups, which is more evident in hypertensive 
patients with NIDDM. Right: Medial cross-sectional area in subcutaneous small resistance arteries 
from normotensive subjects (NT), essential hypertensive patients (HT), normotensive patients with 
NIDDM and hypertensive patients with NIDDM (NIDDM and HT). An increase may be observed 
in the diabetic patients, which is more evident in normotensive patients with NIDDM. (*)p = 0.06, 
*p < 0.05 vs. Normotensives. Mean ± SEM. (re-drawn, data from [12])14 Microvascular Structural Alterations and Tissue Perfusion186
vascular leakage and angiogenesis, growth hormones and the insulin-like growth 
factor-1 (IGF-1) are involved, as mediators, in angiogenesis.
14.3  Microvascular Structural Alterations  
and Organ Perfusion
As previously mentioned, the extent of structural alterations in small resistance 
vessels is more pronounced in patients with both diabetes mellitus and hyperten-
sion, thus suggesting that clustering of risk factors may have synergistic deleteri-
ous effects on the vasculature [12, 13]. An important pathophysiological and 
clinical consequence of the presence of structural alterations in small resistance 
arteries and arterioles may be an impairment of vasodilator reserve [16]. In fact, as 
previously reported, remodelling of small resistance arteries is characterized by a 
narrowing of the lumen, which leads to an increase of flow resistance even at full 
dilatation, i.e. in the absence of vascular tone. A significant correlation between 
coronary flow reserve and subcutaneous small resistance artery remodelling has 
been observed in hypertensive patients, suggesting that structural alterations in 160
120
80
40
0
05 0∗p < 0.01, σ p < .05
∗
σσ
σ
σ
100
Pressure (mmHg)Lumen Diameter (mm)
150 200
Fig. 14.2 Myogenic response in subcutaneous small resistance arteries in patients with 
NIDDM. Passive pressure–lumen diameter relations for arteries from control subjects (square), 
patients with EH (triangle), and hypertensive patients with NIDDM (circle). * =  p < 0.05, ANOV A, 
vs. control. Active pressure–lumen diameter relations for arteries from control subjects (filled 
square), patients with essential hypertension (filled triangle), and hypertensive patients with 
NIDDM (filled circle). σ = p < 0.05 vs. control vessels (from [13])
D. Rizzoni et al.187
small resistance arteries may be present at the same time in different vascular dis-
tricts, including those of paramount clinical importance, such as the coronary cir -
culation [17]. Recently, we have observed a correlation between media-to-lumen 
ratio of cerebral small resistance arteries and cerebral blood flow in the cortical 
grey matter, basal ganglia, thalami and subcortical white matter (Fig.  14.3), thus, 
again, suggesting that more pronounced alterations of small vessels may be associ-
ated to an impaired tissue perfusion [18]. Cerebral autoregulation, a mechanism 
aimed at maintaining constant brain flow in the presence of changes in mean blood 
pressure is shifted rightward in hypertension [19], and this may have a conse-
quence in terms of excessive reduction in cerebral perfusion during abrupt reduc-
tions in blood pressure [19, 20].
It was observed also that a relatively close correlation exists between structure of 
subcutaneous small resistance arteries of normotensive subjects and hypertensive 
patients and microvessel density in the derma, as evaluated by an immunohisto-
chemical approach (immunostaining for CD 31), thus suggesting that structural 
changes in the microcirculation may be present simultaneously at different levels 
[21] (Fig. 14.4).
An impaired microvascular hyperaemic response (which may reflect an altered 
flow reserve) has been observed in children with diabetes mellitus [22] as well as in 
adult patients with NIDDM [23]. Thus, alterations in the microcirculation may play 
an important role in the development of organ damage not only in hypertension but 
also in diabetes mellitus. In fact, a relevant prognostic role of an increased media-
to-lumen ratio of subcutaneous small resistance arteries in a high-risk population 
(including normotensive and hypertensive diabetic patients) has been previously 
demonstrated [24]. Also the characteristics of the vascular remodelling, i.e. eutro-
phic vs. hypertrophic remodelling was taken into account. For the same values of 
internal diameter, those subjects who suffered cardiovascular events had a greater 
r = –0.521 p < 0.05 r = –0.612 p < 0.01
.0700.0800.0900M/L ratio
M/L ratio.1000.1100.1200
.0700.0800.0900.1000.1100.1200
45,00 50,00 55,00
CBF basal ganglia60,00 65,00 18,00 20,00 22,00
CBF subcortical white matte r24,00
Fig. 14.3 Left graph: correlation between cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the basal ganglia and 
media-to-lumen (M/L) ratio of cerebral arteries. Right graph: correlation between CBF in the 
subcortical white matter and M/L ratio of cerebral arteries. Empty circles normotensive subjects, 
full circles hypertensive patients (from [18])14 Microvascular Structural Alterations and Tissue Perfusion188
media-cross-sectional area, in comparison with those without cardiovascular events 
[25]. Therefore, it seems that, for the same size of the vessels explored, a more con-
sistent cell growth (hypertrophic remodelling, such as that observed in diabetic 
patients) means an even worse prognosis. It has been also suggested, as previously 
reported, that an impairment of myogenic response may have a relevant role in the 
development of hypertrophic remodelling in patients at high cardiovascular risk. In 
addition, an impaired myogenic response in small vessels may also induce an 
increase of high blood pressure flow to target organs and downstream increase in 
capillary pressure, with consequent increased permeability and capillary leakage. 
Fluid extravasation may induce organ damage. Some data support the presence of 
an increased capillary pressure in patients with diabetes mellitus [26], especially if 
they have increased blood pressure values [27], although at present time there is no 
general agreement about this issue.
The increase in capillary pressure seems to be related to the extent of clinical 
complications as well as to metabolic control [28]. Also vascular rarefaction per se 
may have important consequences in terms of tissue perfusion. In fact, it has been 
demonstrated that in patients with NIDDM, the mechanisms through which insulin 
is able to increase total limb flow or achieve optimal microvascular perfusion is 
impaired [14].
As mentioned, hypertension seems to be also associated with a reduction (rar -
efaction) in the number of parallel-connected arterioles and capillaries [6, 29], with 
possibly important consequences in terms of tissue perfusion [6]. Microvascular 
density may be evaluated non-invasively by videomicroscopy/capillaroscopy in 
specific cutaneous regions or in the nailfold [7, 8, 29]. In general, a functional rar -
efaction (reduction of capillaries perfused in basal condition) or a structural rarefac-
tion (reduction of capillaries that may be recruited, i.e. after venous congestion) 
may be observed in essential hypertension [6, 29]. Therefore, capillary rarefaction 
observed in hypertension is very likely a permanent anatomical change rather than 
a functional one. Whether it is pathologically important in terms of worsening the 
disease or generating complications is still a matter of debate, although it is proba-
ble that it might be associated to increased peripheral resistance and impaired tissue 00.030.060.090.120.15
1234 5r = –0.57, p < 0.01, r2 = 0.3271y = –0.0094x + 0.1051M/L
MVD (%)Fig. 14.4 Correlation 
between media-to-lumen 
ratio (M/L) of 
subcutaneous small 
resistance artery and 
microvessels density 
(MVD) in the derma of 
normotensive subjects 
(empty circles) and 
hypertensive patients (full 
circles). Reprinted from 
[21], with permission from 
IOS Press
D. Rizzoni et al.189
perfusion, thus, consequently, to organ damage [30]. At present, however, we do not 
have convincing evidence of a prognostic value of a decreased capillary density in 
hypertension [29], at difference to what demonstrated for small resistance artery 
remodelling [24].
Tissue perfusion might be altered, especially in diabetes mellitus, also due to 
impaired myogenic properties of small vessels [13] (Fig.  14.2). In normal controls 
and in essential hypertension, an increase in intraluminal or transmural pressure is 
associated with vasoconstriction, in order to protect tissues from an overperfusion. 
This autoregulatory function is also vital to ensure stabilization of distal capillary 
pressures and, hence, to prevent, or limit, organ damage. Indeed in any animal model 
studied, when myogenic autoregulation is affected, target organ damage ensues [31]. 
Myogenic autoregulation is damaged in diabetes mellitus [13] (Fig.  14.2), and an 
excessive transmission of flow and energy to the periphery might be involved in the 
development of hypertrophic remodelling, usually seen in the vasculature of diabetic 
patients [31]. An impaired myogenic tone was also observed to be present in the 
cerebral or cardiac vasculature [32, 33], at least in animal models.
In any case, it is well accepted that cerebral lacunar infarctions [34], or large 
white matter hyperintensities [35], are usually expression of cerebral microvascular 
disease. Pulsatility index was associated with lower memory scores and worse per -
formance on tests assessing executive function. When magnetic resonance imaging 
measures (grey and white matter volumes, white matter hyperintensity volumes and 
prevalent subcortical infarcts) were included in cognitive models, haemodynamic 
associations were attenuated or no longer significant, consistent with the hypothesis 
that increased aortic stiffness and excessive flow pulsatility damage the microcircu-
lation, leading to quantifiable tissue damage and reduced cognitive performance. 
Marked stiffening of the aorta is associated with reduced wave reflection at the 
interface between carotid and aorta, transmission of excessive flow pulsatility into 
the brain, microvascular structural brain damage and lower scores in various cogni-
tive domains [36]. Middle cerebral artery pulsatility was also demonstrated to be the 
strongest physiological correlate of leukoaraiosis, independent of age, and it resulted 
dependent on aortic diastolic blood pressure and pulse pressure and on aortic and 
middle cerebral artery stiffness, supporting the hypothesis that large artery stiffen-
ing results in increased arterial pulsatility with transmission to the cerebral small 
vessels resulting in leukoaraiosis [36].
Therefore, it seems that a close relationship has been established between 
brain microvascular damage and indices of age and large artery stiffness (pulse 
pressure, aortic pulse wave velocity, and augmentation index) [36]. A possible 
pathophysiological explanation of this link can be offered on the basis of differ -
ential input impedance in the brain and kidney, compared with other systemic 
vascular beds: torrential flow and low resistance to flow in these organs exposes 
small arterial vessels to the high-pressure fluctuations that exist in the carotid, 
vertebral, and renal arteries. Such fluctuations, measurable as central pulse pres-
sure, increase three- to fourfold with age. Exposure of small vessels to highly 
pulsatile pressure and flow explains microvascular damage, renal insufficiency 
and intellectual deterioration [36].14 Microvascular Structural Alterations and Tissue Perfusion190
Finally, another issue possible relevant in respect with impaired tissue perfusion 
in pathological conditions is represented by the loss of anticontractile activity of 
perivascular fat.
A large body of evidence has accumulated suggesting that adipose tissue is prob-
ably highly metabolically active [37, 38]. This has important implications for the 
vasculature where the perivascular adipose tissue (PV AT) exerts an anticontractile 
effect through the paracrine actions of vasodilator adipokines. These adipose-
derived vasodilators act independently of the endothelium and include adiponectin, 
nitric oxide, hydrogen sulphide and palmitic acid methyl ester [36]. In patients with 
metabolic syndrome there is clear evidence that this anticontractile function is lost 
[39]: the perivascular environment becomes inflamed with increased oxidative 
stress, macrophage activation [40] and the release of a number of cytokines that can 
influence the bioavailability of key vasodilator molecules such as adiponectin [39]. 
The lack of a vasodilator effect mediated by perivascular fat might expose periph-
eral tissue to hypoperfusion [36].
14.4  Effect of Treatment on Microvascular  
Structural Alterations
Since changes in microvascular structure have a profound and direct effect on the 
development of hypertension complications and cardio-cerebrovascular events [24], 
it is expected that prevention/regression by appropriated treatment of these altera-
tions may be associated with a better prognosis [41, 42].
In hypertension, some intervention studies with specific drugs have demon-
strated an improvement or even an almost complete normalization of the structure 
of subcutaneous small resistance arteries with angiotensin converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors (cilazapril, perindopril, lisinopril), calcium channel blockers 
(nifedipine, amlodipine, isradipine), angiotensin II receptor blockers (losartan, 
irbesartan, candesartan, olmesartan and valsartan) [3 , 29, 43]. On the contrary, the 
β-blocker atenolol and the diuretic hydrochlorothiazide had limited effects on 
resistance vessels,  despite a similar blood pressure reduction [3 , 29, 43]. ACE 
inhibitors proved to be significantly more effective than the β -blocker atenolol in 
terms of changes in media-to-lumen ratio [43]. The same result was obtained com-
paring dihydropyridinic calcium channel blockers and atenolol, or angiotensin 
receptor blockers and atenolol [43]. It should also be noted that, during antihyper -
tensive treatment, the regression of microvascular structural alterations in the sub-
cutaneous small arteries of hypertensive patients is paralleled by an improvement 
of coronary flow reserve [42, 44].
Basal and total capillary density is increased in effectively treated antihyperten-
sives [45–47]. Hypertensive patients with their blood pressure well controlled with 
the combination perindopril/indapamide [45, 46] or lercadipine/enalapril [47] 
showed an improvement/normalization of capillary density, whereas other antihy-
pertensive treatments, including the combination lercanidipine/hydrochlorothia-
zide, had less effect despite similar blood pressure control [45, 47]. An improvement 
D. Rizzoni et al.191
in retinal capillary rarefaction was observed recently after valsartan treatment in 
hypertensive patients [48].
Inhibitors of angiogenesis, extensively used in oncology, may induce an increase 
in blood pressure values also through a reduction in capillary density [49]. This 
effect might have a clinical relevance in terms of cardiovascular risk and/or manage-
ment of these patients [49].
Few data are presently available about the possibility to improve or restore the 
anticontractile effect of PV AT in humans. Blockade of the renin-angiotensin sys-
tem [50] or antioxidants such as melatonin [51] seem to be effective, while also 
bariatric surgery seems to reverse the obesity-induced alteration to PV AT anticon-
tractile function [52]. This reversal is attributable to reductions in local adipose 
inflammation and oxidative stress with improved adiponectin and nitric oxide bio-
availability [52].
Similarly, there are not many data about the effect of treatment on structural and 
functional alterations in the microcirculation of patients with diabetes mellitus. In 
the United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS), a large randomized 
controlled trial that included almost 5000 patients, it has been demonstrated that a 
tight haemodynamic and metabolic control is associated with a lower incidence of 
microvascular disease [53], and, in general, of clinical endpoints related to micro-
vascular disease [54].
Even fewer data are presently available about the effects of antihypertensive 
drugs on small artery structure in hypertensive diabetic patients. Despite effective 
antihypertensive treatment, resistance arteries from hypertensive diabetic patients 
showed marked remodelling, greater than that of vessels from untreated, nondia-
betic, hypertensive subjects, in agreement with the high cardiovascular risk of sub-
jects suffering from both diabetes and hypertension [55]. A study has compared the 
effects of 1 year treatment with the ACE inhibitor (enalapril) or the angiotensin II 
receptor blocker (candesartan), on subcutaneous small artery structure in hyperten-
sive patients with NIDDM [56]. The two drugs were equally effective in reducing 
media-to-lumen ratio of small arteries (Fig.  14.5), however, candesartan was more 
effective than enalapril in normalizing vascular collagen content, probably through 
a more pronounced stimulation of the local production of metalloproteinase 9 (a 
collagen-degrading enzyme). At variance to what is observed in the majority of 
studies in normoglycaemic hypertensive patients, media-to-lumen ratio of small 
arteries in treated diabetic patients did not reach the values observed in normoten-
sive controls, therefore suggesting that a complete regression of vascular hypertro-
phic remodelling is probably more difficult to obtain [56]. Angiotensin II receptor 
blockers seem to be effective in diabetic hypertensive patients also when given on 
top of an ACE inhibitor treatment [57].
It has been recently proposed that drugs that may stimulate PPARα or PPAR γ 
receptors (such as fibrates of glitazones) may be useful in terms of vascular protec-
tion and regression of structural alterations in the microcirculation although no con-
vincing data is presently available. The sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor, 
dapagliflozin was demonstrated to be able to favourably affect microvascular and 
macrovascular circulation [58].14 Microvascular Structural Alterations and Tissue Perfusion192
Few data about patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus are presently available. A 
study from Greenstein et al. [59] suggests that, with poor metabolic control, small 
arteries from patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus show hypertrophic growth in 
response to elevated blood pressure, similar to that seen in type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
However, metabolic improvements enable eutrophic remodelling to occur in 
response to an increase in blood pressure [59].
 Conclusion
Probably, more than affecting resistance, microvascular rarefaction has the poten-
tial to disturb the cellular delivery of nutrients and oxygen, thus contributing to 
hypertensive end-organ damage [60]. Circumstantial evidence along this line 
comes from measurements of tissue partial pressure of oxygen in rat models of 
hypertension, where relative hypoxia occurred in the cremaster, a muscle in which 
rarefaction was consistently demonstrated, but not the spinotrapezius, a muscle in 
which no rarefaction was found [60]. The theoretical impact of rarefaction on tis-
sue oxygenation was also investigated by modelling the spatial distribution of 
partial pressure of oxygen with a finite element method; in that simulation, sup-
pression of 25% of microvessels generated extended areas of profound hypoxia, 
especially in the presence of high cellular demand for oxygen [60].
Alterations in the microcirculation represent a common finding, and 
 microangiopathy is one of the most important mechanisms involved in the devel-
opment of organ damage as well as of clinical events in patients with diabetes 
mellitus [61, 62]. Both patients with essential hypertension and those with NIDDM 
are characterized by alterations in the resistance vasculature, i.e. an increased 
****BP (mmHg) :147/91 132/82 * 151/95    131/82*0.15
0.13
0.11
0.09MEDIA/LUMEN RATIO
0.07
Basal
candesar tanAfter 1 ye ar
candesar tanAfter 1 y ear
enalapr ilBasal enalapr il
Fig. 14.5 Media-to-lumen ratio in subcutaneous small resistance arteries from hypertensive 
patients with NIDDM, before and after 1-year treatment with the ACE inhibitor enalapril or the 
angiotensin II receptor blocker candesartan. A significant and similar reduction was observed with 
both drugs. BP blood pressure. ** = p < 0.01 vs. Basal. (re-drawn, data from [56]
D. Rizzoni et al.193
media-to-lumen ratio, that in diabetics is the consequence of the  so-called hyper -
trophic remodelling [61, 62]. Structural alterations of small arteries are associated 
with an increased cardiovascular risk in hypertensive and diabetic patients, perhaps 
as a consequence of an impaired organ flow reserve in several vascular districts, 
including the coronary vascular bed [61, 62]. In fact, it has been observed that the 
presence of an increased wall-to-lumen ratio in the subcutaneous resistance arter -
ies is associated with a worse prognosis in high-risk patients [61]. Hypertrophic 
remodelling, such as that observed in diabetic patients, seems to be associated with 
an even worse prognosis [25]. Data about the effect of therapy on microvascular 
structure in diabetic patients are scarce; however, renin-angiotensin system block-
ade seems to be effective in regressing, at least in part, the microvascular structure 
[61]. Blockers of the angiotensin-aldosterone system and calcium antagonists are 
effective in regressing small resistance artery remodelling in hypertension [43], 
and this regression seems to be clinically advantageous [41]; the same drug classes 
together with the diuretic indapamide were also able to improve microvascular 
density [45– 47], however, in this case we do not know whether this improvement 
is associated with a better clinical prognosis.
References
 1. Mulvany MJ, Aalkjaer C. Structure and function of small arteries. Physiol Rev. 1990;70:921–71.
 2. Christensen KL, Mulvany MJ. Location of resistance arteries. J Vasc Res. 2001;38:1–12.
 3. Schiffrin EL. Remodeling of resistance arteries in essential hypertension and effects of antihy-
pertensive treatment. Am J Hypertens. 2004;17:1192–200.
 4. Mulvany MJ. Structural abnormalities of the resistance vasculature in hypertension. J Vasc 
Res. 2003;40:558–60.
 5. Bund SJ, Lee RMKW. Arterial structural changes in hypertension: a consideration of method-
ology, terminology and functional consequences. J Vasc Res. 2003;40:547–57.
 6. Levy BI, Ambrosio G, Pries AR, Struijker-Boudier HAJ. Microcirculation in hypertension. A 
new target for treatment? Circulation. 2001;104:735–40.
 7. Antonios TF, Singer DR, Markandu ND, Mortimer PS, MacGregor GA. Rarefaction of skin 
capillaries in borderline essential hypertension suggests an early structural abnormality. 
Hypertension. 1999;34:655–8.
 8. Antonios TF, Singer DR, Markandu ND, Mortimer PS, MacGregor GA. Structural skin capil-
lary rarefaction in essential hypertension. Hypertension. 1999;33:998–1001.
 9. Blonde L.  State of diabetes care in the United States. Am J Manag Care. 2007;13(Suppl 
2):S36–40.
 10. Aronson D. Cross-linking of glycated collagen in the pathogenesis of arterial and myocardial 
stiffening of aging and diabetes. J Hypertens. 2003;21:3–12.
 11. McNally PG, Watt PAC, Rimmer T, Burden AC, Hearnshaw JR, Thurston H. Impaired contrac-
tion and endothelium-dependent relaxation in isolated resistance vessels from patients with 
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Clin Sci. 1994;87:31–6.
 12. Rizzoni D, Porteri E, Guelfi D, Muiesan ML, Valentini U, Cimino A, Girelli A, Rodella L, 
Bianchi R, Sleiman I, Agabiti Rosei E.  Structural alterations in subcutaneous small arter -
ies of normotensive and hypertensive patients with non insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. 
Circulation. 2001;103:1238–44.14 Microvascular Structural Alterations and Tissue Perfusion194
 13. Schofield I, Malik R, Izzard A, Austin C, Heagerty AM. Vascular structural and functional 
changes in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Evidence for the role of abnormal myogenic responsive-
ness and dyslipidemia. Circulation. 2002;106:3037–43.
 14. Clark MG, Barrett EJ, Wallis MG, Vincent MA, Rattigan S. The microvasculature in insulin 
resistance and type 2 diabetes. Semin Vasc Med. 2002;2:21–31.
 15. Jumar A, Harazny JM, Ott C, Friedrich S, Kistner I, Striepe K, Schmieder RE. Retinal capil-
lary rarefaction in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. PLoS One. 2016;11(12):e0162608.
 16. Folkow B. Physiological aspects of primary hypertension. Physiol Rev. 1982;62:347–504.
 17. Rizzoni D, Palombo C, Porteri E, Muiesan ML, Kozàkovà M, La Canna G, Nardi M, Guelfi D, 
Salvetti M, Morizzo C, Vittone F, Agabiti Rosei E. Relationships between coronary vasodilator 
capacity and small artery remodeling in hypertensive patients. J Hypertens. 2003;21:625–32.
 18. De Ciuceis C, Cornali C, Porteri E, Mardighian D, Pinardi C, Fontanella MM, Rodella LF, 
Rezzani R, Rizzoni D, Boari GE, Agabiti Rosei E, Gasparotti R. Cerebral small-resistance 
artery structure and cerebral blood flow in normotensive subjects and hypertensive patients. 
Neuroradiology. 2014;56:1103–11.
 19. Agabiti Rosei E, Rizzoni D. In:Coca A, editor. Pathophysiology of brain damage in hyperten-
sion: small vessels disease. In: Hypertension and brain damage. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing AG Switzerland; 2016. p. 47–60.
 20. Vaughan CJ, Delanty N. Hypertensive emergencies. Lancet. 2000;356(9227):411–7.
 21. Paiardi S, Rodella LF, De Ciuceis C, Porteri E, Boari GE, Rezzani R, Rizzardi N, Platto C, 
Tiberio GA, Giulini SM, Rizzoni D, Agabiti-Rosei E.  Immunohistochemical evaluation of 
microvascular rarefaction in hypertensive humans and in spontaneously hypertensive rats. Clin 
Hemorheol Microcirc. 2009;42(4):259–68.
 22. Shore AC, Price KJ, Sandeman DD, Greeen EM, Tripp JH, Tooke JE. Impaired microvascular 
hyperhaemic response in children with diabetes mellitus. Diabet Med. 1991;8:619–23.
 23. Strain WD, Chaturvedi N, Nihoyannopoulos P, Bulpitt CJ, Rajkumar C, Shore AC. Differences 
in the association between type 2 diabetes and impaired microvascular function among 
Europeans and African Caribbeans. Diabetologia. 2005;48:2269–77.
 24. Rizzoni D, Porteri E, Boari GEM, De Ciuceis C, Sleiman I, Muiesan ML, Castellano M, 
Miclini M, Agabiti-Rosei E. Prognostic significance of small artery structure in hypertension. 
Circulation. 2003;108:2230–5.
 25. Izzard AS, Rizzoni D, Agabiti-Rosei E, Heagerty AM. Small artery structure and hypertension: 
adaptive changes and target organ damage. J Hypertens. 2005;23:247–50.
 26. Parving HH, Viberti GC, Keen H, Christensen JS, Lassen NA. Hemodynamic factors in the 
genesis of diabetic microangiopathy. Metabolism. 1983;32:943–9.
 27. Fegan PG, Tooke JE, Gooding KM, Tullet JM, MacLeod KM, Shore AC. Capillary pressure 
in subjects with type 2 diabetes and hypertension and the effect of antihypertensive therapy. 
Hypertension. 2003;41:1111–7.
 28. Sandeman DD, Shore AC, Tooke JE.  Relation of skin capillary pressure in patients with 
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus to complications and metabolic control. N Engl J Med. 
1992;327:760–4.
 29. Agabiti Rosei E, Rizzoni D. The effects of hypertension on the structure of human resistance 
arteries. In: Lip GYH, Hall JE, editors. Comprehensive hypertension, vol. 207, chapter 47. 
Amsterdam: Mosby Elsevier; 2007. p. 579–90.
 30. Levy BI, Schiffrin EL, Mourad JJ, Agostini D, Vicaut E, Safar ME, Struijker- Boudier 
HA. Impaired tissue perfusion: a pathology common to hypertension, obesity, and diabetes 
mellitus. Circulation. 2008;118:968–76.
 31. Sonoyama K, Greenstein A, Price A, Khavandi K, Heagerty T.  Vascular remodeling: 
implications for small artery function and target organ damage. Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis. 
2007;1:129–37.
 32. Delaney PJ, Burnham MP, Heagerty AM, Izzard AS. Impaired myogenic properties of cerebral 
arteries from the Brown Norway rat. J Hypertens. 2012;30:926–31.
 33. Izzard AS, Heagerty AM. Myogenic properties of brain and cardiac vessels and their relation 
to disease. Curr Vasc Pharmacol. 2014;12:829–35.
D. Rizzoni et al.195
 34. Hashimoto J, Aikawa T, Imai Y . Large artery stiffening as a link between cerebral lacunar 
infarction and renal albuminuria. Am J Hypertens. 2008;21(12):1304–9.
 35. Brisset M, Boutouyrie P, Pico F, Zhu Y , Zureik M, Schilling S, Dufouil C, Mazoyer B, Laurent 
S, Tzourio C, Debette S. Large-vessel correlates of cerebral small-vessel disease. Neurology. 
2013;80:662–9.
 36. Rizzoni D, Agabiti-Rosei C, Agabiti-Rosei E.  Hemodynamic consequences of changes 
in microvascular structure. Am J Hypertens. 2017;30:939. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajh/
hpx032.
 37. Ahima RS. Adipose tissue as an endocrine organ. Obesity. 2006;14(Suppl 5):242S–9S.
 38. Guerre-Millo M. Adipose tissue hormones. J Endocrinol Investig. 2002;25:855–61.
 39. Greenstein AS, Khavandi K, Withers SB, Sonoyama K, Clancy O, Jeziorska M, Laing I, 
Yates AP, Pemberton PW, Malik RA, Heagerty AM. Local inflammation and hypoxia abol-
ish the protective anticontractile properties of perivascular fat in obese patients. Circulation. 
2009;119:1661–70.
 40. Withers SB, Agabiti Rosei C, Livingstone DM, Little MC, Aslam R, Malik RA, Heagerty 
AM.  Studies in CD11b-DTR macrophage deficient mice prove that macrophage activation 
is responsible for the loss of anticontractile function in inflamed perivascular adipose tissue. 
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011;31:908–13.
 41. Buus NH, Mathiassen ON, Fenger-Grøn M, Præstholm MN, Sihm I, Thybo NK, Schroeder 
AP, Thygesen K, Aalkjær C, Pedersen OL, Mulvany MJ, Christensen KL. Small artery struc-
ture during antihypertensive therapy is an independent predictor of cardiovascular events in 
essential hypertension. J Hypertens. 2013;31:791–7.
 42. Agabiti-Rosei E, Rizzoni D. Microvascular structure as a prognostically relevant endpoint. J 
Hypertens. 2017;35:914–21.
 43. Agabiti-Rosei E, Heagerty AM, Rizzoni D.  Effects of antihypertensive treatment on small 
artery remodelling. J Hypertens. 2009;27:1107–14.
 44. Buus NH, Bøttcher M, Jørgensen CG, Christensen KL, Thygesen K, Nielsen TT, Mulvany 
MJ. Myocardial perfusion during long-term angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition or beta-
blockade in patients with essential hypertension. Hypertension. 2004;44:465–70.
 45. Rizzoni D. Impact of different antihypertensive treatments on the microcirculation. Microcirc 
Cardiovasc Dis. 2012;7:3–7.
 46. Debbabi H, Bonnin P, Levy BI. Effects of blood pressure control with perindopril/indapamide 
on the microcirculation in hypertensive patients. Am J Hypertens. 2010;23:1136–43.
 47. De Ciuceis C, Salvetti M, Rossini C, Muiesan ML, Paini A, Duse S, La Boria E, Semeraro F, 
Cancarini A, Agabiti Rosei C, Sarkar A, Ruggeri G, Caimi L, Ricotta D, Rizzoni D, Agabiti 
Rosei E. Effect of antihypertensive treatment on microvascular structure, central blood pressure 
and oxidative stress in patients with mild essential hypertension. J Hypertens. 2014;32:565–74.
 48. Jumar A, Harazny JM, Ott C, Kistner I, Friedrich S, Schmieder RE.  Improvement in reti-
nal capillary rarefaction after valsartan treatment in hypertensive patients. J Clin Hypertens 
(Greenwich). 2016;18:1112–8.
 49. Rizzoni D, Paini A, Salvetti M, Rossini C, De Ciuceis C, Agabiti-Rosei C, Muiesan 
ML. Inhibitors of angiogenesis and blood pressure. Curr Cardiovasc Risk Rep. 2013;7(3):244–7.
 50. Agabiti Rosei C, Withers SB, Belcaid L, De Ciuceis C, Rizzoni D, Heagerty AM. Blockade 
of the renin-angiotensin system in small arteries and anticontractile function of perivascular 
adipose tissue. J Hypertens. 2015;33:1039–45.
 51. Agabiti-Rosei C, De Ciuceis C, Rossini C, Porteri E, Rodella LF, Withers SB, Heagerty 
AM, Favero G, Agabiti-Rosei E, Rizzoni D, Rezzani R. Anticontractile activity of perivas-
cular fat in obese mice and the effect of long-term treatment with melatonin. J Hypertens. 
2014;32:1264–74.
 52. Aghamohammadzadeh R, Greenstein AS, Yadav R, Jeziorska M, Hama S, Soltani F, Pemberton 
PW, Ammori B, Malik RA, Soran H, Heagerty AM. Effects of bariatric surgery on human 
small artery function: evidence for reduction in perivascular adipocyte inflammation, and the 
restoration of normal anticontractile activity despite persistent obesity. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;62:128–1235.14 Microvascular Structural Alterations and Tissue Perfusion196
 53. Adler AI, Stratton IM, Neil HA, Yudkin JS, Matthews DR, Cull CA, Wright AD, Turner 
RC, Holman RR. Association of systolic blood pressure with macrovascular and microvas-
cular complications of type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 36): prospective observational study. BMJ. 
2000;321:412–9.
 54. Tight blood pressure control and risk of macrovascular and microvascular complications in 
type 2 diabetes: UKPDS 38. UK Prospective Diabetes Study Group. BMJ 1998;317:703–13.
 55. Endemann DH, Pu Q, De Ciuceis C, Savoia C, Virdis A, Neves MF, Touyz RM, Schiffrin 
EL. Persistent remodeling of resistance arteries in type 2 diabetic patients on antihypertensive 
treatment. Hypertension. 2004;43:399–404.
 56. Rizzoni D, Porteri E, De Ciuceis C, Sleiman I, Rodella L, Rezzani R, Paiardi S, Bianchi R, 
Ruggeri G, Boari GE, Muiesan ML, Salvetti M, Zani F, Miclini M, Rosei A. Effect of treat-
ment with candesartan or enalapril on subcutaneous small artery structure in hypertensive 
patients with non insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Hypertension. 2005;45:659–65.
 57. Savoia C, Touyz RM, Endemann DH, Pu Q, Ko EA, De Ciuceis C, Schiffrin EL. Angiotensin 
receptor blocker added to previous antihypertensive agents on arteries of diabetic hypertensive 
patients. Hypertension. 2006;48:271–7.
 58. Ott C, Jumar A, Striepe K, Friedrich S, Karg MV , Bramlage P, Schmieder RE. A randomised 
study of the impact of the SGLT2 inhibitor dapagliflozin on microvascular and macrovascular 
circulation. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2017;16(1):26.
 59. Greenstein AS, Price A, Sonoyama K, Paisley A, Khavandi K, Withers S, Shaw L, Paniagua O, 
Malik RA, Heagerty AM. Eutrophic remodeling of small arteries in type 1 diabetes mellitus is 
enabled by metabolic control: a 10-year follow-up study. Hypertension. 2009;54(1):134–41.
 60. Feih F, Liaudet L, Waeber B, Levy BI.  Hypertension: a disease of the microcirculation? 
Hypertension. 2006;48:1012–7.
 61. Agabiti Rosei E, Rizzoni D.  Small artery remodelling in diabetes. J Cell Mol Med. 
2010;14:1030–6.
 62. Rizzoni D, Agabiti Rosei E.  Small artery remodeling in diabetes mellitus. Nutr Metab 
Cardiovasc Dis. 2009;19:587–92.
D. Rizzoni et al.197 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_15
Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology 
and Treatment: A Forty-Y ear Retrospect
Jonathan Owen, Stephen Morse, Angela McLean, 
and Efrain Reisin
15.1  Introduction
During the past 40 years of research into obesity, hypertension, and chronic kidney 
disease, we have gained considerable knowledge on the effects of excess weight gain 
to alter numerous metabolic and hormonal processes, which can ultimately result in 
type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and chronic kidney failure. Over this span of 
time, we have witnessed the naming of these metabolic and hormonal alterations as 
a new condition, the Metabolic Syndrome. Additionally, we have noted that hyper -
tension in obesity appears to have some unique differences to essential hypertension 
in the normal weight population, and have preferred the term Obesity-Hypertension 
in our description of this process. Unfortunately, also during this timeframe, the obe-
sity epidemic worldwide has continued to surge unabated, and research into this 
topic is now more poignant than ever. This review will focus on an overview of this 
condition from insights gained over the preceding 40 plus years of research experi-
ence in this field, with an emphasis on Obesity-Hypertension.
Obesity and excess body weight result from the increase in the size and amount of 
fat cells. Obesity as a disorder is defined as excess body fat, and the most typical 
screening tool for the measurement of obesity in the general population is the Body 
J. Owen 
Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico Health 
Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM, USA
S. Morse · E. Reisin ( *) 
Section of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, Louisiana State 
University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, USA
e-mail: ereisi@lsuhsc.edu
A. McLean 
Section of Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Louisiana State University Health 
Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, USA15198
Mass Index (BMI). This measure is calculated by dividing a person’s weight in kilo-
grams by the square of a person’s height in meters. The World Health Organization 
has developed the following definitions using BMI for normal weight (BMI 18.5 kg/
m2 to <25 kg/m2), overweight (BMI 25 kg/m2 to <30 kg/m2), and obesity (BMI 30 kg/
m2 or greater) [1 ]. The definition of obesity has likewise been further subcategorized 
into three categories: class 1 (BMI 30 kg/m2 to <35 kg/m2), class 2 (BMI 35 kg/m2 to 
<40 kg/m2), and class 3 (BMI 40 kg/m2 or greater) [2 ]. The term “morbid obesity” has 
also frequently been used to describe patients with BMI > 40 kg/m2, although some 
have proposed this definition should include obesity at any stage with an obesity-
related illness such as type 2 diabetes or obesity- hypertension [3 ]. Though BMI has 
been a useful tool for describing obesity in the general population, it should be noted 
that it is not a direct measure of adiposity in the individual, and substantial variations 
can occur individually based upon adiposity and muscle mass [4 ]. Additionally, BMI 
also has limitations in that it does not allow for differentiation of visceral adiposity 
versus ectopic adiposity, which appears to have important consequences in regard to 
metabolic disease, as we will discuss later. Nonetheless, given its widespread adop-
tion and ease of calculation, and the general correlation with adiposity in most patients, 
it has been the most widely used of the definitions for obesity in the general popula-
tion, and unless specified will be the definition used for the purposes of this review [5 ].
Regardless of definition, obesity has become a worldwide epidemic, with a dou-
bling of rates across the globe since the 1980s, and increases have been seen in all 
regions during this timeframe, including Sub-Saharan Africa, an area previously 
low risk to this condition [6, 7]. In other analyses, body weight has been previously 
recognized as the sixth most important risk factor contributing to the overall burden 
of disease worldwide, and was felt to overtake smoking as the main preventable 
cause of death in the United States as of 2005 [8]. Though a multitude of genetic and 
environmental factors likely play a role in the surging rates of obesity worldwide, 
the most commonly implicated cause is an increasingly sedentary lifestyle seen 
with advancing technologies, coupled with the increased availability of energy 
dense, highly processed foods containing an excess of added fats, sugars, or both.
Obesity has long been recognized as a substantial contributor to the development of 
hypertension, with early data from the Community Hypertension Evaluation Clinic 
(CHEC) trial demonstrating the prevalence of hypertension up to two times higher in 
those who were overweight compared to individuals of normal weight, and three times 
higher for those individuals with low weight [9 ]. Similarly, it has been estimated that 
three-fourths of the overall prevalence of hypertension in the general population is felt 
to be attributable to obesity [10]. It has been recognized as early as the 1940s and 1950s 
that upper body obesity carries a higher risk of metabolic and cardiovascular complica-
tions, and over time this has been redefined to describe the variations as visceral fat 
accumulation versus ectopic fat accumulation, with a substantial body of evidence 
demonstrating a much more dangerous metabolic profile with visceral fat deposits 
[11–15]. In addition to the risk of hypertension, visceral adiposity is strongly associ-
ated with the development of the Metabolic Syndrome, a strong predictor of future 
cardiovascular events and the development of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Though various 
definitions exist, the metabolic syndrome is generally recognized by the following: 
increased waist circumference (>40 inches for men and >35 inches for women); 
increased serum triglyceride levels (>150  mg/dL); elevated blood pressure 
J. Owen et al.199
(>130/85 mmHg); increased fasting glucose levels (>100 mg/dL); and decreased high-
density lipoprotein cholesterol (<40 mg/dL for men and <50 mg/dL for women) [6 ].
Hypertension remains one of the strongest risk factors for cardiovascular dis-
ease, including the development of stroke, congestive heart failure, and peripheral 
vascular disease. The risk for coronary heart disease death doubles for each increase 
of 20 mmHg in systolic blood pressure over a baseline of 115 mmHg and for each 
10 mmHg increase in diastolic blood pressure beginning at 75 mmHg [16]. In addi-
tion, long-standing hypertension can result in cardiac myocyte cell growth, result-
ing in both concentric (increased thickness and mass of the left ventricle) and 
eccentric (increased septal thickness) hypertrophy; and obesity coupled with hyper -
tension nearly doubles the risk of both forms of cardiac hypertrophy compared to 
patients with hypertension and normal weight [17]. Beyond cardiovascular disease, 
hypertension remains the second leading cause of end-stage kidney disease, and it 
appears obesity may have additive effects, in addition to contribution from associ-
ated hypertension, in the development of this condition [18, 19].
We will focus the remainder of this review on the pathophysiology of obesity- 
hypertension, the treatment of this condition and relative impacts of weight loss via 
lifestyle modification, medications and bariatric surgery, and the role of pharmaco-
therapy for the treatment of hypertension in obesity.
15.2  Pathophysiology of Obesity-Hypertension
The physiology of hypertension in obesity and the metabolic syndrome is complex, 
with an increasingly recognized number of potential mechanisms contributing to 
this condition. Traditionally, the development of this condition was explained as a 
result of increasing plasma volume expansion and cardiac output in the setting of 
increased body mass, with impaired urinary sodium excretion. Vasodilation in the 
setting of increasing cardiac output subsequently results in glomerular hyperfiltra-
tion and increased distal tubular sodium delivery. Hyperinsulinemia, upregulation 
of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, and the increase in sympathetic tone in 
obesity causes increased distal sodium reabsorption and impaired natriuresis, thus 
resulting in hypertension [20–33].
Although this explanation remains pivotal in the understanding of this condition, 
the precise mechanism underlying these changes appear increasingly complex, and 
a variety of newly discovered neuro-hormonal peptides, cytokines and adipokines 
likely additionally contribute to this condition, including leptin, ghrelin, glucagon- 
like peptide 1 (GLP-1), and adiponectin.
We will explore the potential contribution of these components, as well as other 
physiological derangements in obesity in further detail.
15.2.1  Hemodynamic Alterations
The increase in cardiac output and plasma volume are long observed effects of obe-
sity, and it was long ago described by Guyton that impaired natriuresis in this condi-
tion must account for the development of hypertension [30]. The elevated stroke 15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect200
volume and the increased intravascular volume cause eccentric cardiac hypertrophy 
and the elevated blood pressure in the same patients is followed by a concentric 
ventricular hypertrophy. Consequently the cardiac remodeling of the obese hyper -
tensive patients is characterized by a concentric-eccentric ventricular hypertrophy 
that may be the cause for the increased prevalence of congestive heart failure, 
arrhythmia, and sudden death in the obese population [20]. The elevated sympa-
thetic activity in obese subjects may cause more arrhythmia and coronary artery 
disease but the effect of hyperleptinemia and hyperinsulinemia in cardiac remodel-
ing remain controversial [21]. Reisin et al. reported in 1987 that both normotensive 
and hypertensive obese patients have increases in renal blood flow, cardiac output 
and blood volume, in the setting of decreased overall peripheral vascular resistance 
in comparison to patients of normal weight [31]. Thus, in this setting of increased 
renal blood flow and glomerular hyperfiltration, mechanisms must exist to account 
for impaired natriuresis, and to account for the difference observed between obese 
hypertensive patients and obese normotensive patients. The higher increase in glo-
merular filtration ratio compared with the renal flow will increase the filtration frac-
tion and all these hemodynamic changes are the cause for glomerulosclerosis [24].
In an early model of obesity, Reisin et al. described the changes that are associ-
ated with obesity and hypertension in rats with ventromedial hypothalamic electro-
lytic lesions compared with sham controls. These animals developed both obesity 
and hypertension. The cardiac output increased slightly but the peripheral resistance 
remained unchanged [32] (Fig. 15.1).
Hall et al. were able to demonstrate in 1993 the physiologic changes of obesity 
in an elegant model where dogs fed to obese states on a high-fat diet were compared 
to normal weight matched controls. The obese dogs developed hypertension during 
the 5 week study, and were demonstrated to have a marked increase in heart rate and 
cardiac output, though cardiac index remained unchanged, suggesting the increase 
was solely a product of increasing body mass. Increases in blood flow to the kidneys 
and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) were confirmed to develop in these animals. 
Through daily measurement of urinary electrolytes, the obese animals were demon-
strated to have a cumulative net sodium gain of 507 ± 107 mmol compared to the 
normal weight animals. Further corroborating existing models of obesity- 
hypertension is that the obese fed animals had a net fluid gain of 15.7 L compared 
to the normal weight dogs. These animals were further found to have elevated 
plasma insulin and renin activity levels, consistent with the insulin resistant state of 
the metabolic syndrome observed in humans [23].
In a separate animal model using rabbits fed to an obese state and compared to 
normal weight controls, Carrol et al. demonstrated similar findings with respect to 
cardiac output, heart rate, cardiac index, and peripheral vascular resistance. In this 
model, however, the group was able to demonstrate significant differences with 
respect to regional organ blood flow rates. The obese rabbits in this example showed 
significant increases in blood flow to the kidneys, ovaries, ventricles, and lungs. 
Regional flow to adipose tissue, however, was decreased. Thus, it is hypothesized 
that as cardiac output increases with adiposity and increased body size, the relative 
avascularity of adipose tissue leads to an increase in flow to vital organs in 
J. Owen et al.201
comparison to adipose tissue, accounting for difference seen within renal blood 
flow and glomerular hyperfiltration. It should be noted that in this study the weights 
of vital organs increased in the obese subjects as well, and this was mostly attributed 
to lean mass. Therefore, increased metabolic demand in obesity may also account 
for differences in regional blood flow rates [33].
Though animal models have limitations when compared to human subjects, 
these findings correlate well to observations seen in human subjects and provide a 
vital framework in our understanding of obesity-hypertension. As these changes in 
cardiac output and renal blood flow are seen in both “obese normotensive” individu-
als and obese hypertensive subjects in the metabolic syndrome, other important 
features must exist within the metabolic syndrome to account for impaired natriure-
sis encountered in obesity-hypertension.
When the renal and systemic hemodynamic findings in obese and lean normoten-
sive and hypertensive subjects were studied, the obese patients had an increased renal 
blood flow, increased total blood volume and increased cardiac output, as compared CENTRAL
OBESITY
↑Insulin ↑Free F atty Acids
↑Adipokines
↓HDL
↑Triglycer ides↑Leptin
↑SNS
↓ANP activity
↑RAAS
↑Na reabsor ption
↑Volume
Endothelial Dysfunction
Microalb uminur ia
Pre-h ypertension
Hyper tension, CKD , CVD , T2DM↑Insulin Resistance
↑B-cell apoptosis
Fig. 15.1 Components and pathways of the metabolic syndrome. HDL High-density lipoprotein, 
SNS Sympathetic nervous system, ANP Atrial natriuretic peptide, RAAS Renin-angiotensin aldo-
sterone system, Na Sodium, CKD Chronic kidney disease, CVD Cardiovascular disease, T2DM 
Type 2 diabetes mellitus. (Figure reprinted with permission from Morse S, Zhang R, Thakur V , 
Reisin E. Hypertension and the Metabolic Syndrome. Am J Med Sci. 2005;330(6):303–10)15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect202
to the lean normotensive and hypertensive patients. The total peripheral and renal 
vascular resistance was decreased. These investigators have shown that elevated car -
diac output and volume expansion in obese patients also increased renal perfusion 
and decreased renal vascular resistance [32]. The higher increase in glomerular filtra-
tion ratio compared with the renal flow will increase the filtration fraction and these 
hemodynamic changes are the likely mechanism for glomerulosclerosis [24].
In summary, the pathological lesion that characterizes the pathology of the 
human kidney in obesity-hypertension subjects is the development of glomerulo-
megaly with focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis [19].
15.2.2  Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System  
Dynamics in Obesity-Hypertension
Upregulation of the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System (RAAS) is perhaps 
the best described mechanism accounting for impaired natriuresis in this condi-
tion. Upregulation of the RAAS system occurs despite a volume expanded state, 
which in normal physiology would downregulate RAAS expression. Multiple 
likely mechanisms for RAAS upregulation exist and include: (1) direct renin 
secretion via β -adrenergic stimulation by the sympathetic nervous system, (2) 
increased expression of RAAS components by the adipocyte itself and particu-
larly inflamed adipocytes as seen in visceral obesity, (3) extrinsic renal parenchy-
mal compression via intra-abdominal fat, and (4) extra-adrenal secretion of 
aldosterone from adipocytes [30, 34].
In the normal state, renin is produced by the juxtaglomerular (JG) apparatus in 
response to renal hypoperfusion in the setting of hypotension, and by catecholamine 
induced activation of β-1 adrenergic receptors located on the JG apparatus. Renin 
then converts free circulating angiotensinogen into angiotensin I, which is subse-
quently converted to angiotensin II in the lungs by the angiotensin-converting 
enzyme type 1 (ACE-1). Angiotensin II then binds to angiotensin receptor 1 (ATR1) 
on vascular smooth muscle cells, resulting in vasoconstriction. Additionally, angio-
tensin II directly stimulates the ATR1 in the proximal tubule to increase sodium 
reabsorption, and it stimulates the ATR1 in the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal 
gland to produce aldosterone, which results in increased sodium and water reab-
sorption in the distal tubule. In addition to this, ACE-1 also inactivates bradykinin 
and kallidin, which are potent vasodilators. In the setting of hypotension or shock, 
the RAAS system provides a useful mechanism to raise arterial blood pressure and 
minimize sodium and water wasting. However, in chronically activated states, such 
as in catecholamine excess seen in obesity, this results in excess sodium and volume 
retention and the development of hypertension [35].
The increase in baseline sympathetic tone in obesity is well documented and is 
likely a major component of chronic RAAS activation in obesity hypertension 
[36–38]. Both increases in muscle sympathetic nerve activity and baseline cate-
cholamine levels have been observed in obese human subjects [38– 40]. One poten-
tial mechanism for this increase in sympathetic tone is via the hyperinsulinemic 
J. Owen et al.203
state seen in the insulin resistant metabolic syndrome. Insulin has been shown to 
directly stimulate the sympathetic nervous system in human normotensive and pre-
hypertensive patients, however concomitant vasodilation in response to insulin 
infusion limits rise in arterial pressure in response to insulin in the normal state 
[41, 42]. It is not clear, however, if the vasodilatory properties of acute insulin 
release persist in the chronic hyperinsulinemic state, with some suggestion that in 
the setting of insulin resistance, the sympathetic effects of insulin may persist but 
without the vasodilatory properties. It has been well documented that chronic 
hyperinsulinemia is a strong predictor of hypertension, and hyperinsulinemia has 
been associated with hypertension independent of body mass index [43, 44].
Further, patients with normotension but hyperinsulinemia in the fasting state 
have been shown to have a twofold higher risk of developing hypertension in a four- 
year follow-up compared to normal controls [45].
In addition to hyperinsulinemia due to insulin resistance in obesity, obese human 
subjects have also been found to have leptin resistance and hyperleptinemia [46, 
47]. In the normal state, leptin, a peptide hormone produced by adipocytes, stimu-
lates receptors within the hypothalamus that signals overfeeding and induces a feel-
ing of satiety, and via activation of the proopiomelanocortin pathway stimulates the 
sympathetic nervous system resulting in sympathetic activation [48–50]. Leptin 
infusion in the rare cases of leptin deficiency results in thermogenesis, anorexia, and 
weight loss [51–54]. However, in the hyper-leptin obese scenario, it no longer 
appears to have an influence on food intake or weight regulation, though it contin-
ues to exert an effect on sympathetic upregulation [55].
Further corroboration of the potential role of leptin in the development of blood 
pressure and SNS activation is the observation that mutations of melanocortin path-
way and inactivation of the leptin receptor delete hypertension despite hyperlepti-
nemia, and that animals undergoing chronic leptin infusion developed hypertension 
[56–59]. Furthermore, the hypertensive effect of leptin appears to be abolished with 
α- and β-adrenergic blockade, reinforcing the hypothesis that leptin’s hypertensive 
effects are potentiated via sympathetic activation [60].
Finally, sympathetic overactivation is also felt to occur because of sleep disor -
dered breathing and obstructive sleep apnea, which has been consistently shown to 
occur with greater frequency in obesity. Frequent nocturnal arousals in this condi-
tion have been shown to result in sympathetic bursts and result in increased baseline 
sympathetic tone in individuals with this condition [61–64]. More recently, it has 
been shown that volume expansion in obesity and rostral fluid shifts leading to pala-
tial and neck edema at night when patients are supine may be the underlying mecha-
nism accounting for sleep apnea in obese individuals [65, 66]. Therefore, though 
OSA is a consequence of volume expansion, its occurrence appears to result in a 
vicious cycle of further sympathetic activation and sodium retention, worsening the 
condition as well as the development of hypertension.
Beyond the sympathetic induced activation of RAAS in obese subjects, it appears 
that the adipocyte itself may have an important influence in increasing RAAS 
expression in obesity. All components of the RAAS system have been found within 
adipose tissue, and the renin receptor has been isolated to the adipocyte cell wall 15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect204
[35, 67, 68]. Intriguingly, the renin receptor concentration was found to be much 
greater on visceral adipocytes than in ectopic adipocytes, suggesting adipocyte 
derived RAAS expression may account for some of the metabolic and hypertensive 
differences observed between visceral and ectopic obesity [69]. RAAS expression 
within the adipocyte appears to have an important role in visceral fat differentiation 
and growth, and interestingly, mice with angiotensin receptor inactivation and 
angiotensinogen knockout mice were both found to be immune to the development 
of diet induced obesity and hypertension despite a high-fat diet [70–74]. Increased 
expression of RAAS components is felt to influence systemic RAAS expression 
either from direct systemic secretion of these products from the adipocyte, or from 
“spillage” from the adipocyte, particularly in the setting of adipocyte hypoxia com-
monly seen in visceral obesity [35, 75–77]. It has been demonstrated in mice that as 
much as 30% of circulating angiotensinogen can be derived from the adipocyte 
[78]. Additionally, increased adipocyte derived angiotensinogen gene expression 
has been demonstrated in obese humans [77, 79].
A theorized but unconfirmed potential mechanism for increased RAAS expres-
sion in obesity-hypertension is from external compression of the kidneys from vis-
ceral fat deposits seen in severely advanced stages of obesity [35]. Retroperitoneal 
fat in humans tightly encases the renal capsule and can invade the renal sinuses. 
This compression, in theory, could result in reduced effective renal blood flow and 
distal tubule sodium delivery, which would then be sensed by the macula densa, and 
RAAS expression would be increased via the tubuloglomerular feedback mecha-
nism. Strong correlations between retroperitoneal fat and hypertension risk were 
reported from both the Framingham Heart Study cohort and the Dallas Heart study 
to support this hypothesis [80, 81].
Finally, in addition to increased adrenal production of aldosterone in response to 
elevated angiotensin II levels with RAAS upregulation, the adipocyte itself has 
more recently been shown to be a source of extra-adrenal aldosterone [82]. The 
extra-adrenal production of aldosterone by the adipocyte may account for the find-
ings of increased circulating aldosterone levels in visceral adiposity [83–87]. The 
degree to which extra-adrenal aldosterone contributes to obesity hypertension is less 
clear at this time, though numerous studies have linked hyperaldosteronism with 
inflammation and fibrosis of the vasculature and major organs, and this appears to 
be an important target for future investigation [88–90]. Further supporting this find-
ing is the observation that aldosterone antagonists appear to have a greater effect at 
reducing systemic blood pressure in patients with central adiposity as compared to 
other patients with resistant hypertension [91].
15.2.3  Sympathetic Nervous System in Obesity-Hypertension
Beyond RAAS stimulation, the increase in sympathetic tone in obesity additionally 
may result in alpha mediated vasoconstriction, beta mediated increased cardiac out-
put, and direct increase in urinary sodium reabsorption via the proximal tubule and 
loop of Henle, resulting in elevated mean arterial pressure. The potential impact of 
J. Owen et al.205
the sympathetic system influencing impaired natriuresis was well demonstrated in a 
follow-up study using the dog model described earlier in the chapter. In this follow-
 up study, the obesity induced hypertensive dogs were shown to have resolution of 
hypertension after undergoing renal sympathetic nerve denervation, a powerful 
demonstration of the influence of sympathetic system on natriuresis [92].
Increase in efferent renal sympathetic nerve activity has been shown to increase 
sodium retention, and this has been a suspected target for the impairment of natri-
uresis seen in obesity hypertension [39]. Unfortunately, despite numerous animal 
models and several early human trials demonstrating dramatic improvements in 
blood pressure with renal denervation, its use in human patients is currently 
inconclusive, with disappointing results for denervation when compared to sham 
renal artery catheter placement in the simplicity-3 trial [93]. Therapeutic applica-
tion with this technique is therefore uncertain for now and will require further 
investigation [94].
Nonetheless, the likely prominence of the role of the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem as a major mechanism in the development of obesity hypertension is reinforced 
by the finding that systolic blood pressure and mean arterial pressure is reduced by 
a greater amount by combined α-, β-blockade in hypertensive subjects with obesity 
versus lean hypertensive patients [95]. These findings suggest a more significant 
role of the sympathetic system in obesity hypertension when compared to other 
forms of hypertension.
15.2.4  Ghrelin, GLP-1, and Other Hormones
A multitude of relatively newly discovered gut peptide hormones, cytokines and 
adipokines may additionally contribute to the development of obesity hypertension. 
One intriguing possibility is the potential role of Ghrelin, a peptide hormone derived 
from gastric cells in response to caloric restriction. Ghrelin typically stimulates 
appetite in response to diminished food intake [96]. In human patients, Ghrelin infu-
sion was shown to have a hypotensive effect, resulting in a drop in both systolic and 
diastolic blood pressure in both obese and lean subjects. Despite this hypotensive 
effect, Ghrelin infusion resulted in increased muscle sympathetic nerve activity and 
a rise in serum cortisol levels. Though the study was small, the obese subjects were 
noted to have a more pronounced reduction in systolic blood pressure compared to 
the normal weight subjects (−11 mmHg vs. −6 mmHg) [97]. Ghrelin overexpres-
sion has not been found to be associated with most forms of human obesity, and in 
fact obese subjects have been associated with low serum Ghrelin levels, raising the 
possibility that the absence of this hormone and its antihypertensive effects may 
influence the development of hypertension in obesity [98].
The role of ghrelin is further complicated, however, from observations from bar -
iatric surgery. Gastric reduction surgeries, such as laparoscopic gastric banding, 
result in increased levels of circulating ghrelin in the postoperative state; whereas 
gastric resection type surgeries, such as the sleeve gastrectomy or the Roux-en-Y 
gastric bypass results in a further decrease in circulating ghrelin levels [99–101]. 15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect206
Paradoxically though, the resection type surgeries are associated with a far superior 
improvement in hypertension compared to reduction surgeries, though other factors 
may complicate this such as the degree of weight loss [102]. Nonetheless, the poten-
tial impact of ghrelin on obesity hypertension is incompletely understood and 
requires more investigation.
Glucagon-like peptide-1 has more recently gained notice as a potential contribu-
tor to both the development of the metabolic syndrome and possibly as well to 
obesity hypertension. GLP-1 affects gastric emptying and influences insulin sensi-
tivity [103]. The GLP-1 agonists liraglutide and exenatide have been shown to have 
modest effects at lowering weight and blood pressure in patients with type II diabe-
tes mellitus, and the blood pressure reduction with these medications appears to be 
greater than would be expected to a corresponding weight reduction alone [104–
107]. In contrast to these findings, however, Krisai et al. demonstrated a linear cor -
relation between fasting plasma GLP-1 levels and ambulatory blood pressure in 
human subjects [108]. Additionally, studies on infusions of GLP-1 have been mixed, 
with some findings demonstrating acute infusions raising blood pressure, while oth-
ers have showed a chronic infusion resulting in natriuresis via release of atrial natri-
uretic peptide [109–111].
Finally, adiponectin, an adipokine secreted by healthy adipose tissue, appears to 
have numerous positive effects on the cardiovascular system, with higher levels 
associated with lower blood pressure, improved insulin sensitivity, and reduced 
basal sympathetic tone [112–114]. Levels of adiponectin are reduced however in 
visceral obesity, and it is felt that this may additionally contribute to the develop-
ment of obesity hypertension, though the mechanism is unclear at this time.
Beyond ghrelin, GLP-1, and adiponectin, a myriad of additional gut peptides, 
adipokines and inflammatory cytokines appear to be altered in obesity and the meta-
bolic syndrome. The potential of these other agents to affect blood pressure in obe-
sity hypertension is incompletely understood. Certainly, the complexity of this 
condition will continue to widen with future investigations into this interesting 
pathology (Fig. 15.2).
15.3  Treatment of Obesity-Hypertension
15.3.1  Weight Loss: Lifestyle Modification
It has long been proven by Reisin et  al. that weight loss, regardless of sodium 
restriction, results in significant improvement in arterial blood pressure [115]. In 
addition to effects on blood pressure, weight loss in obese subjects has been shown 
to result in significant improvement in other cardiometabolic risk factors of the 
metabolic syndrome including hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia [116–121]. As a 
result of these findings, it has been universally recommended that all patients with 
obesity and metabolic syndrome undergo lifestyle modification with a focus on 
weight loss through diet and exercise. Unfortunately, sustained weight loss with 
lifestyle modification alone is difficult to achieve in practice, and poor overall 
J. Owen et al.207
weight loss has been observed in long-term studies [122–124]. Further complicat-
ing matters, an ever-increasing number of weight-reducing diet plans now exist and 
the metabolic impact of each style of diet is uncertain [125]. Likewise, the potential 
impact of diet versus exercise or both, as well as the type of exercise performed and 
its impact on hypertension and other metabolic components, is also a matter of 
debate [126–129].
In terms of the magnitude of blood pressure improvement to be expected with 
weight loss, several meta-analyses have now been conducted regarding the available 
studies. In 2003, Neter et al. conducted a review of 25 randomized controlled trials 
of the effect of weight loss on hypertension [130]. A total of 4874 patients were 
included in the analysis. In this analysis, an average weight reduction of 5.1kg, or 
5.8% of initial body weight, resulted in a decrease in systolic blood pressure (SBP) 
of 4.44 mmHg, and a decrease in diastolic blood pressure of 3.57 mmHg. In sub- 
analysis, greater weight loss resulted in larger decreases in both systolic and dia-
stolic blood pressure, with weight loss of greater than 5.0 kg resulting in a reduction 
in SDP of 6.24 mmHg, and DBP to 4.97 mmHg, compared to 2.44 mmHg SBP and 
1.97 mmHg DBP in those with weight loss of less than 5.0 kg. The reduction in this 
study corresponded to a reduction of 1.1/0.9 mmHg SBP/DBP per kilogram of body 
weight lost, which corresponded well to an earlier smaller analysis of randomized 
controlled trials by Stassen et al. demonstrating a decrease of 1.2/1.0 mmHg SBP/
DBP per kilogram body weight lost [131].Renal
Parench ymal
Compression
Angiotensinogen
Aldosterone
LeptinInsulin Resistance
Hyper insulinemiaAdipocyte
SNS
Volume
ExpansionHTNRAAS
Glomerular
Hyperfiltration
OverfeedingSleep Disordered
BreathingDecreased Plasma
Ghrelin
Decreased
GLP-1
Fig. 15.2 Mechanisms of Obesity-Hypertension. (Figure reprinted with permission from Owen 
JG, Yazdi F, Reisin E. American Journal of Hypertension 2017;31(1):11–17)15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect208
A later review by Aucott et al. in 2005 sought to determine the durability of blood 
pressure reduction with weight loss over time [132]. This analysis examined a total of 
14 studies, with a total of 4952 patients, and ranging in follow-up from 2 to 11 years. 
The study was confounded by inclusion of trials with surgical weight loss as well as 
medication induced weight loss. Though a rough correlation of a 1:1 ratio of blood 
pressure decrease mmHg per kilogram body weight was observed in the short term; 
when examining results greater than 2 years after weight loss this dissipated to a pre-
dicted drop in blood pressure of 6.0/4.6 mmHg per 10 kg of body weight lost. Thus, it 
was concluded that long-term reduction in blood pressure with weight loss might be 
roughly half that estimated from shorter term trials. A separate, later review of eight 
clinical trials by the same group in 2009, predicted a drop of SBP by 5.6 mmHg for 
5 kg weight loss, confirming the earlier estimates, however the reduction could not be 
predicted from the data for diastolic blood pressure and appeared to become less reli-
able for follow-up of greater than 3 years, again calling into question the long-term 
durability of blood pressure reduction after weight loss [133].
Most recently, a Cochrane review by Semlitsch et al. has again reexamined this 
issue [134]. In this review, a total of eight randomized controlled trials met criteria 
for review, with a total of 2100 patients. Overall, a reduction of 4.5/3.2 mmHg was 
observed with an average weight reduction of 4  kg, consistent with the roughly 
1:1 mmHg/kg weight loss from baseline reduction in blood pressure as noted from 
previous reports. Therefore, though these results are overall modest, the consistent 
finding of an improvement in blood pressure with weight loss, coupled with 
observed improvements in other cardiometabolic risk factors with weight loss, rein-
force the importance of the recommending weight loss for all patients with 
obesity-hypertension.
The ideal type of diet, which should induce weight reduction and improvement 
in cardiometabolic risk factors, remains controversial. The so-called DASH diet, 
adopted from the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) trial, is per -
haps the most well studied of the available popular diet plans. In the original trial, 
459 patients with blood pressures less than 160/95 mmHg were recruited [135]. In 
the first 3 weeks, all patients were given the control diet, which was felt typical of 
the average diet in the United States at the time of the study. After the 3-week run in 
period, the patients were then stratified into one of three dietary pattern groups for 
the next 8 weeks. In the first group, the patients continued to receive the control diet. 
In the second group, the patients were given a diet rich in fruits and vegetables com-
pared to the control group. Finally, in the third group, the patients were given a 
“combination” diet rich in fruits and vegetables, as well as low-fat dairy and with an 
emphasis on reduction of saturated fat compared to the control group and group 
two. All meals and snacks for the participants were prepared by the study sites and 
participants were not allowed outside food. Importantly, all participants in all three 
groups were restricted to 3 gm daily of sodium. In both intervention arms, the potas-
sium target was 4700 mg per day, compared to 1700 mg per day in the control arm. 
Both intervention arms in the DASH trial produced significant reductions in blood 
pressure, with the most improvement in the third “combination group.” The fruit 
and vegetable only group saw a decrease overall of 2.8/1.1 mmHg in blood pressure 
J. Owen et al.209
versus the control group, and the combination group saw an improvement of 
5.5/3.0 mmHg in blood pressure versus the controls. More impressively, when the 
patients with hypertension at study inclusion were sub-analyzed, the hypertensive 
patients in the combination group saw a reduction of blood pressure of 11.4/5.5 mmHg 
compared to the control group. Likewise, the hypertension patients in the fruit and 
vegetable group saw an improvement in blood pressure of 7.2/2.8 mmHg compared 
to the control group. The combination group diet from DASH emphasizing increased 
fruits and vegetables, increased low-fat dairy, and decreased saturated fat intake has 
since become known as the DASH diet. It should be noted, however, that in popular 
culture the DASH diet is often referred to as a low sodium diet, and while naturally 
low in sodium, the original study had no differences in sodium intake between the 
intervention arms and the control group. Therefore, the differences in blood pres-
sure reduction could not be explained from sodium restriction with this diet, but 
must occur via alternate mechanisms such as increased intake of potassium, intake 
of antioxidants and other micronutrients from fruits/vegetables, from decreased 
saturated fat intake and improvement in omega-3 fatty acid consumption, or possi-
bly via increased intake of milk proteins [136, 137].
The ENCORE study was a subsequent evaluation of the DASH diet alone or in 
combination with a weight loss and exercise plan compared to controls, and demon-
strated that the DASH diet combined with weight loss was far superior to DASH 
diet alone in reducing blood pressure [138]. This study demonstrated an impressive 
reduction of blood pressure of 16.1/9.9 mmHg when the DASH diet was combined 
with exercise and weight loss versus a reduction in pressure of 11.2/7.5 mmHg via 
the DASH diet alone. In a secondary analysis of the ENCORE study, the same 
group sought to examine the effects of the DASH diet on other parameters of the 
metabolic syndrome; notably insulin sensitivity, fasting lipid profile, and exercise 
capacity [139]. Interestingly, this analysis demonstrated improvement in these fea-
tures only in the group weight loss and exercise combined with DASH diet. The 
DASH diet alone had no changes in these features compared with the control diet. 
Thus, it was concluded that although DASH diet is helpful in improving blood pres-
sure alone; weight loss is essential to improve other cardiovascular risk factors of 
the metabolic syndrome. Furthermore, a meta-analysis of nine studies on the DASH 
diet published by Shirani et al. in 2013 failed to demonstrate improvements in fast-
ing blood glucose or insulin resistance with the DASH diet, though improvement in 
fasting insulin concentration was seen, though this appeared to be strongly influ-
enced by one study calling in to question this conclusion [140].
The Mediterranean diet has been more recently popularized, and shares many 
features of the DASH diet including high consumption of fruits and vegetables but 
emphasizes increased consumption of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats via 
nuts, fish, legumes and olive oil; and the regular but moderate consumption of wine 
with meals. Enthusiasm for this diet was bolstered by an observational study involv-
ing 22,043 patients in Greece that demonstrated a lower risk of all-cause mortality, 
death from coronary artery disease, and death from cancer in patients with the high-
est dietary compliance to the traditional components of this diet [141]. The 
PREDIMED study was a later, randomized controlled trial of 7447 patients who 15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect210
were randomized to receive either instruction on a low-fat diet, instruction on the 
Mediterranean diet with supplementation of 1 L of olive oil to be ingested per week, 
or instruction on the Mediterranean diet with supplementation of 30gm of mixed nuts 
per week (walnuts, hazelnuts, and almonds) [142]. In this trial, there was a significant 
reduction in cardiovascular events in both the olive oil group (HR 0.7; 95% CI 0.54–
0.92) and the nut groups (HR 0.72; 95% CI 0.54–0.96). However, a subsequent criti-
cism is that the control arm, despite instruction in low-fat diet, failed to achieve 
adequate fat intake reduction in practice and thus comparison of Mediterranean diet 
to a low-fat diet was limited in this model. In regard to blood pressure reduction with 
the Mediterranean diet, two sites in Spain who recruited into the PREDIMED trial 
also randomized patients into a prospective arm evaluating ambulatory blood pres-
sure response to the Mediterranean diet versus control at one year following random-
ization [143]. In this sub-study, the patients receiving the Mediterranean diet 
supplemented with olive oil saw a reduction in ambulatory blood pressure of 
2.3/1.2 mmHg; and those patients receiving the Mediterranean diet supplemented 
with nuts saw a reduction in ambulatory blood pressure of 2.6/1.2 compared to an 
increase of ambulatory blood pressure of 1.7/0.7 mmHg in the patients on the control 
diet. This study was small in overall size, however. A later sub-analysis of the 
PREDIMED data group revealed a modest improvement in diastolic, but not systolic 
blood pressure with both Mediterranean diet groups when compared to the control 
diet [144]. Finally, in a meta-analysis by Gay et  al., examining different dietary 
approaches and impact on hypertension, the authors examined four trials on the 
Mediterranean diet and noted a small but significant reduction in diastolic but not 
systolic blood pressure [145]. Diastolic pressure was reduced by 1.44 mmHg in this 
analysis with the Mediterranean diet. However, this compared poorly to the DASH 
diet, which had the greatest blood pressure reduction of all diets compared in this 
systematic review with an average reduction of 7.62/4.22 mmHg.
More recently, low carbohydrate and very low carbohydrate diets have gained in 
popularity. Concerns have persisted since the introduction of these diets as carbohy-
drates are generally replaced with either fat or protein. Given the earlier studies on 
low-fat diets and improvement in metabolic parameters, several have questioned 
whether these diets may confer increased cardiovascular risks over time, particularly 
if the fat substituted is in the form of saturated fats [146]. Additionally, as high pro-
tein intake has been associated with accelerated renal function decline in animal 
models, concern has also been expressed regarding the long-term effects on the kid-
ney with high protein diets [147, 148]. Somewhat surprisingly, however, early data 
on low carbohydrate diets suggest they may be superior to low-fat diets for weight 
loss as well as in improving cardiometabolic risk factors for many patients. In 2003, 
two initial and groundbreaking trials were published in the New England Journal of 
Medicine supporting the potential benefit of low carbohydrate over low- fat diets. In 
the first study by Samaha et al., 132 patients with high prevalence of metabolic syn-
drome or diabetes were randomized into a low carbohydrate diet versus a low-fat 
diet. The low carbohydrate group lost 3.9 kg more than the low-fat group, had a 
greater reduction in their serum triglycerides (− 20% vs. − 4%), and had greater 
improvement in insulin sensitivity [149]. In the second study by Foster et al., 63 
J. Owen et al.211
patients were randomized to a low carbohydrate versus a low protein diet. Similarly, 
in the short term, patients on the low carbohydrate diet lost more weight than in the 
low-fat group, though effect was less at 1 year. The low carbohydrate group also saw 
greater improvements in triglycerides and HDL cholesterol, though LDL and blood 
pressure was similar between the two groups [150]. Since that time, numerous reports 
have continued to demonstrate favorability of low carbohydrate diets in regard to 
weight loss and improvement in cardiometabolic risk factors [151– 154].
In terms of blood pressure improvement with carbohydrate restriction, an analy-
sis of the DiOGenes study demonstrated an approximately 2.2 mmHg lower systolic 
blood pressure in the high protein group versus the control diet [155]. Similarly, in 
the OmniHeart study, replacement of carbohydrate with protein resulted in mean 
improvement in systolic blood pressure of 1.4 mmHg in normotensive patients, and 
by 3.5 mmHg in hypertensive subjects. In this same trial, replacement of carbohy-
drate with monounsaturated fat also lowered mean systolic blood pressure by 
1.3 mmHg in normotensive patients and 2.9 mmHg in hypertensives, thus arguing 
for benefit of carbohydrate restriction in obesity-hypertension [156]. Longer term 
cardiovascular outcomes with these diets, however, are still lacking, and very little 
information exists regarding long-term renal outcomes, though early data on short 
term renal effects is reassuring [147, 157].
15.3.2  Weight Loss: Pharmacotherapy
Several weight-loss inducing drugs are now available and are being increasingly 
used as adjunct therapy with lifestyle medication to promote weight loss. The cur -
rently available drugs include phentermine, phentermine in combination with topi-
ramate, orlistat, lorcaserin, bupropion, and liraglutide. These drugs exert effects 
through a variety of mechanisms: sympathetic activation, serotonin agonism, anti-
depression, and via GLP-1 agonism. The precise impact of each medication on 
patients with hypertension is less clear at this time, though a cause of concern given 
their mechanisms of action. Previously, sibutramine was withdrawn from the mar -
ket as a weight loss agent due to effects of increasing blood pressure and concern for 
exacerbating cardiovascular events. A recent, large systematic review was con-
ducted on the available pharmacologic agents and their effect on patients with 
hypertension. Orlistat, an intestinal fat absorption blocker, was found to have a ben-
efit in lowering blood pressure, with an average reduction of 2.5/1.9 mmHg. There 
was insufficient data, however, on the remaining weight loss inducing drugs for the 
authors to make conclusions regarding these drugs and blood pressure [158].
15.3.3  Weight Loss: Bariatric Surgery
Intentional weight loss through lifestyle modification with diet and exercise is rec-
ommended in all cases of obesity-hypertension. As noted, however, sustained 
weight loss through lifestyle modification alone is difficult in practice, and most 15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect212
patients meet with long-term or failure or unsatisfactory magnitude of weight loss 
in their efforts. Increasingly, patients are opting for surgical weight loss via bariatric 
procedures. Bariatric surgery has been proven to be the most reliable and durable 
method for sustained weight loss in patients with obesity, with substantial improve-
ments and in many cases resolution of features of the metabolic syndrome [102, 
159]. Control of diabetes mellitus type II has been proven to have superior results 
following bariatric surgery versus intensive lifestyle modification alone, and these 
results appear to persist long term [160–162]. Though a significant improvement is 
seen in hypertension as well in the short term following bariatric surgery, significant 
concern has existed about the long-term durability of hypertension control after an 
initial report from the Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS) trial [163]. In this trial, 
approximately 2000 patients were randomized to intensive lifestyle modification or 
bariatric surgery involving either traditional Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, vertical 
banded gastroplasty, or adjustable gastric banding. The incidence of hypertension at 
2 and 10 years was not found to be different between the surgical group and the 
control group in the initial report; though the resolution of pre-existing hypertension 
in the study did favor surgery, suggesting an effect.
In 2012, however, the SOS data was reexamined by the authors due to an 
increased number of available 10 year follow-up data and to evaluate for a differ -
ence in the rates of hypertension control in patients who had a malabsorptive proce-
dure (byass) versus a gastric restrictive procedure (banding) [164]. The re-analysis 
was more favorable to surgery for long-term control of hypertension in patients 
undergoing gastric bypass, with an average reduction of 12.1/7.3 mmHg at 2 years, 
and 5.1/5.6 mmHg at 10 years. Gastric banding was found to have roughly half the 
reduction in blood pressure of gastric bypass at 2 years, but at 10 years there was no 
difference in hypertension compared to controls. Similar to other studies, gastric 
bypass in this analysis demonstrated superior weight loss to gastric banding.
Reassuringly, several large meta-analyses have been conducted demonstrating 
consistent benefits of bariatric surgery in regard to hypertension (Table  15.1). 
Though the range of follow-up in the available studies examined varies, the results 
of these analyses suggest that approximately 60–80% of patients will have some 
degree of improvement or resolution of hypertension following bariatric surgery 
[159, 165–169]. These analyses also suggest a lessened effect with restrictive sur -
geries, such as the laparoscopic adjustable band, when compared to the malabsorp-
tive surgeries or those involving gastric resection such as the Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass, the duodenal switch, and the sleeve gastrectomy. In the first major meta-
analysis by Buchwald et al., the resolution of hypertension following gastric band-
ing was 38.4% versus 75.4% with traditional Roux-en-Y and 81.3% after 
biliopancreatic diversion [159]. Likewise, Courcoulus et al. reported remission of 
hypertension after three years in 38.2% of patients undergoing Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass versus 17.4% of patients who had a laparoscopic adjustable gastric band 
placed [170]. As evidenced by these studies, it can be safely assumed that bariatric 
surgery does result in reduction of blood pressure, though this effect may lessen 
over time, and that procedures involving resection of the stomach or malabsorption 
produce roughly twice the effect of gastric banding procedures.
J. Owen et al.213
Table 15.1 Summary of findings from major meta-analysis examining hypertension outcomes 
following bariatric surgery
Meta-analysis and 
date# of 
studies 
evaluated# of patients 
included in 
analysisType of surgery performed and 
impact on hypertensionLength of 
follow up
Sarkhosh 
et al.—201533 3997 LSG 12–48 months
  – 58% resolution at 1  
  year
  – 75% resolution or  
  improvement
Ricci et al.—2014 22 4160 RYGB, BPD, DS, LSG, LAGB, 
GB, VBG24–65 months
  – 48% reduction in risk  
  of hypertensiona
Wilhelm, Young 
Kale- 
Pradhan—201457 52,151 RYGB, BPD, DS, LSG, LAGB, 
GB, VBG1 week–7 years
  – 50% overall resolution
  – Improvement in 63.7%a
Vest et al.—2012 73 19,543 RYGB, BPD, DS, LSG, LAGB, 
VBG3–176 months
  – 62.5% resolved or  
  improveda
Heneghan 
et al.—201152 16,867 RYGB, BPD, LAGB, LAGB, 
VBG3–155 months
  – 68% overall with  
  resolution or  
  improvement (all surgeries)
  – RYGB—60% resolution  
  or improvement
  – BPD—79% resolution or  
  improvement
  – VBG—81% resolution or  
  improvement
  – LAGB—58% resolution  
  or improvement
Buchwald 
et al.—2004136 22,094 RYGB, BPD, DS, LAGB, VBG Follow-up 
length of 
studies 
unavailable
  – 61.7% overall resolution;  
  78.5% improved (all  
  surgeries)
  – RYGB—67.5% resolved;  
  87.2% improved
  – BPD-DS—83.4%  
  resolved; 75.1% improved
  – LAGB—43.2% resolved;  
  70.8% improved
Study definitions vary for resolution and improvement. Abbreviations: BPD biliopancreatic 
 diversion, DS duodenal switch, GB gastric banding, LAGB laparoscopic gastric banding, LSG lapa-
roscopic sleeve gastrectomy, RYGB Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, VBG vertical banded gastroplasty
Table reprinted with permission from Owen JG, Yazdi F, Reisin E.  American Journal of 
Hypertension 2017 [102]
aStudies did not breakdown outcomes by type of surgery performed15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect214
As a result of the robust data on the ability of bariatric surgery to improve the 
cardiometabolic risk factors of obesity and improve weight loss, a joint clinical 
guidelines recommendation was made by the American Association of Clinical 
Endocrinologists, the Obesity Society, and the American Society for Metabolic and 
Bariatric surgery recommending a weight loss surgery for all patients with a Body 
Mass Index (BMI) greater than 40 kg/m2 regardless of comorbidities, for patients 
with a BMI of greater than 35 kg/m2 for patients with one or more obesity-related 
comorbidities, and for patients with a BMI of greater than 30 kg/m2 with diabetes 
mellitus type II [171].
15.3.4  Pharmacotherapy for Hypertension in Obesity
Pharmacotherapy for hypertension in obesity should be selected to achieve a blood 
pressure goal of at least less than 140/90  mmHg while targeting the underlying 
physiology of this condition and minimizing adverse side effects. The ideal drug or 
combination of drugs for this condition, however, has been a matter of some debate 
[34]. Thiazide type diuretics were recommended as first-line blood pressure agents 
in 2003 in the 7th Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, 
Evaluation and Management of high blood pressure (JNC 7) [172], and the use of 
these drugs has been considerable since that time. Significant concern, however, 
was expressed over this recommendation due to the known effect of thiazide type 
diuretics to worsen insulin resistance and fasting glucose levels, raise serum uric 
acid and triglyceride levels, and the potential for these agents to convert metabolic 
syndrome to overt diabetes [173–177]. The original JNC 7 recommendation was 
based on the land-mark Antihypertensive and Lipid Lowering to Treatment to 
Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT), which demonstrated a reduced rate of con-
gestive heart failure with chlorthalidone as compared to Lisinopril or amlodipine for 
blood pressure, and a non-inferiority of chlorthalidone compared to these two drugs 
in regard to other cardiovascular events [178]. Earlier evidence from the multicenter 
TROPHY study, however, demonstrated superiority of Lisinopril to hydrochloro-
thiazide specifically in patients with obesity and hypertension in regard to both 
achievement of blood pressure targets as well as more favorable cardiometabolic 
profiles [179].
Since the initial JNC 7 report, numerous post hoc analyses of the ALLHAT data 
have shed some additional light on this controversy. In the first of these analyses, 
Barzilay et al. evaluated the development of diabetes in patients in the ALLHAT 
trial, and demonstrated a reduced odds ratio of the development of type 2 diabetes 
in patients taking Lisinopril or amlodipine when compared to chlorthalidone (0.55 
and 0.73, respectively) [180]. Similarly, Black et al. examined the development of 
diabetes in patients in ALLHAT sub-grouped to those with and without metabolic 
syndrome at study inception [181]. In this analysis, it was found that in patients with 
metabolic syndrome, the percent of patients who develop overt diabetes was 
increased with chlorthalidone when compared to Lisinopril, but not amlodipine 
(17.1% vs. 12.6% vs. 16%). In those patients without pre-existing metabolic 
J. Owen et al.215
syndrome, however, diabetes developed in a greater number of patients taking 
chlorthalidone than either Lisinopril or amlodipine (7.7% vs. 4.7 vs. 4.2%, respec-
tively). However, despite the worrisome increased risks of diabetes with chlorthali-
done in these analyses, it is important to note that neither analysis found an increase 
of cardiovascular events, total mortality, or ESRD in the chlorthalidone group; and 
the study by Black et  al. confirmed the previously noted decrease in congestive 
heart failure with chlorthalidone when compared to amlodipine in these patients.
Though the lack of cardiovascular events in these analyses is reassuring, consid-
eration has been given as to whether the follow-up period was sufficiently long to 
see an effect of the worsening glycemic control with chlorthalidone. In an intrigu-
ing analysis from the ALLHAT Diabetes Extension Study, a 4 year post study fol-
low-up of 22,418 patients found that though patients with diabetes had a greater 
risk of developing coronary artery disease compared with nondiabetics, the risk 
was less in those patients assigned to chlorthalidone versus lisinopril (HR 1.18 vs. 
2.54; p = 0.04) [182]. This study seemed to suggest that patients who had chlortha-
lidone induced diabetes carried less risk than the other patients in the amlodipine 
and lisinopril groups, and thus it was suggested that diabetes that developed in the 
amlodipine and lisinopril groups might represent a true worsening of insulin resis-
tance and the metabolic syndrome, whereas some of the chlorthalidone induced 
diabetes may have simply been a result of decreased insulin secretion in response 
to hypokalemia induced by chlorthalidone, a finding that has been suggested in 
other studies [183, 184].
In a slightly different concept, Reisin et al. sought to examine if there were dif-
ferences in blood pressure control between the antihypertensive regimens of 
ALLHAT when the patients were stratified into normal weight (BMI <25 kg/m2), 
overweight (BMI 25–29.9 kg/m2), or obese (BMI >30 kg/m2) [185]. The results of 
this analysis showed that there were no significant differences in blood pressure 
control between the amlodipine, chlorthalidone, and lisinopril groups when patients 
were stratified per weight. Secondly, the choice of medication did not seem to have 
a major influence on the rate of cardiovascular events when patients were stratified 
by weight, and thus it was concluded that in obese subjects with hypertension, over -
all blood pressure control appears more important for risk reduction than use of any 
one single class of antihypertensive. Despite these above assurances, concerns still 
exist, especially in younger patients, in regard to worsening glycemic control with 
the use of chlorthalidone.
Given the significant role of the RAAS in the development of obesity- hypertension 
as outlined in the pathophysiology section, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibi-
tors (ACE) and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) would seem to be the ideal 
antihypertensive agent for this condition.
Supporting a significant impact on the underlying pathophysiology of this dis-
ease, a sub-analysis of the Target to Treat study found significant improvements in 
HDL cholesterol levels, fasting blood glucose, serum triglycerides and waist cir -
cumference in patients treated with irbesartan or irbesartan in combination with 
hydrochlorothiazide [186]. These effects, and the diminishment of the negative 
effects of hydrochlorothiazide, were hypothesized to be the result of peroxisome 15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect216
proliferator-receptor gamma (PPARγ) agonist activity of this drug. Both irbesartan 
and telmisartan have been found to have PPARγ agonist activity, arguing for a 
potential role of these two agents in obesity and the metabolic syndrome [187, 188]. 
Likewise, a separate study showed that valsartan in combination with hydrochloro-
thiazide also ameliorated the negative effects of the thiazide diuretic compared to 
hydrochlorothiazide alone [189].
A sub-analysis of diabetic patients enrolled in the Captopril Prevention Project 
found that patients treated with captopril versus a traditional approach using diuret-
ics and/or with the addition of beta-blockers found that the captopril group experi-
enced significantly lower risk of myocardial infarctions (RR = 0.34; P = 0.002) as 
well as total mortality (RR = 0.54; P = 0.034) [190]. This was notable as in the 
larger parent study no difference was found between the two groups, arguing that in 
subset of patients with diabetes and metabolic syndrome RAAS blockade may be 
superior to other drugs. However, it should be noted that beta-blockers, as we will 
discuss below, also have been implicated in worsening glycemic control and weight 
gain, and thus these results could argue that the additive negative metabolic effects 
of diuretics with beta-blockers account for the findings, rather than positive effects 
of ACE inhibition.
Traditional beta-blockers have been associated with exacerbating weight gain 
and worsening glycemic control, with an unacceptable rate of development of dia-
betes ranging from 15% to 28% in several major antihypertensive trials [191–193]. 
For this reason, beta-blockers have been eliminated as first-tier medications for 
hypertension in most antihypertensive guidelines unless a cardiac indication exits. 
We feel practitioners should be especially mindful of these effects in the obese 
population. A small amount of literature exists that suggests the “vasodilating beta- 
blockers” carvedilol, labetalol, and nebivolol may have a more favorable or even 
positive metabolic effects, though this needs confirmation with larger trials [194–
200], and virtually no comparative outcome trials between vasodilating and tradi-
tional beta-blockers have been conducted. Nonetheless, if a beta-blocker is required 
as an add on antihypertensive in the case of resistant hypertension, we favor use of 
one from the vasodilating class for this reason.
Calcium channel blockers are generally well tolerated drugs and are metaboli-
cally neutral with regard to insulin resistance and lipid abnormalities [201]. For this 
reason, these drugs are favored over thiazide diuretics by many as a first-line agent 
for the treatment of obesity-hypertension, despite the previously mentioned 
ALLHAT trial failing to demonstrate superiority and suggesting lower heart failure 
risks with chlorthalidone.
The subsequent large, multicenter Avoiding Cardiovascular Events through 
Combination Therapy in Patients Living with Systolic Hypertension 
(ACCOMPLISH) trial, which compared a combination treatment of benazepril/
amlodipine to benazepril/hydrochlorothiazide, initially seemed to support this 
approach when the trial was stopped early due to the benazepril/amlodipine 
group showing a reduced rate of the primary endpoint of combined cardiovascu-
lar morbidity or mortality [202]. However, this result has received some criti-
cism as the trial used hydrochlorothiazide, rather than the more potent and 
J. Owen et al.217
longer acting chlorthalidone, which was used in ALLHAT [203]. Furthermore, 
the overall differences between the groups, though statistically significant, were 
small and it was suggested this difference may not have been present with 
chlorthalidone due to its longer duration of action, more like that of amlodipine. 
Intriguingly, when a sub- analysis was performed of the ACCOMPLISH data 
stratifying the patients into normal weight, overweight, and obese categories, 
the amlodipine and hydrochlorothiazide groups no longer had significant differ -
ences, whereas the lower weight groups continued to favor amlodipine [204]. 
This was a surprising discovery as it contradicted a major hypothesis that the 
negative metabolic effects of thiazides would result in more negative cardiovas-
cular outcomes in obese subjects.
Nonetheless, given the easy tolerability of calcium channel blockers and their 
noted neutral metabolic effects, most of the recent hypertension guidelines recom-
mend initial therapy to consist of either a calcium channel blocker and/or an ACEi 
or ARB for the treatment of hypertension in patients with obesity and metabolic 
syndrome, with the choice of a thiazide diuretic as an alternative to calcium channel 
blocker if there is difficulty in tolerating that medication, or if a third agent as 
required [205–207]. Generally, we agree with this approach.
In conclusion, as patients with stage II hypertension (BP >160/100) will almost 
inevitably require at least two drugs to achieve hypertension control, we favor an 
ACEi or ARB plus calcium channel blocker combination as initial therapy, and 
agree the third medication added should be a thiazide diuretic, preferably chlortha-
lidone. We also feel that based upon existing available data, excessive fear of thia-
zide diuretics in this population is not necessary, and these drugs are a good 
alternative to use in combination with ACEi/ARBs in the rare setting of calcium 
channel blocker intolerance. Additionally, in cases of obesity-hypertension with 
stage 1 hypertension where monotherapy is adequate, we prefer to initiate treat-
ment with an ACEi or ARB given its effects on the underlying pathophysiology, 
though likewise this can be substituted for a calcium channel blocker or as a second 
choice a thiazide diuretic if the patient is intolerant to the either of these 
medications.
We feel strongly that the beta-blockers should be reserved for fourth tier pur -
poses, unless specific cardiac indications exit, and prefer to use a vasodilating beta- 
blocker when required for the purposes of hypertension. All other drug classes 
should be considered only after these choices have been exhausted.
 Conclusion
During the last 40 years of research into Obesity-Hypertension and its impact on 
the cardiovascular and renal systems, we have witnessed an explosion of knowl-
edge in the field, which has paralleled the rise of the obesity epidemic. The 
pathophysiology of this condition is complex, and involves an ever increasingly 
recognized number of hormones, cytokines, gut-peptides and adipokines, which 
result in large systemic hemodynamic alterations. These alterations, if untreated, 
lead to cardiovascular disease, congestive heart failure, and progression of 
chronic kidney disease.15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect218
Weight loss should be the cornerstone in management of this condition, with 
lifestyle modification the first approach in all cases. If patients are unsuccessful 
in this approach, as often occurs in practice, the underutilized option of bariatric 
surgery should be considered.
It is imperative, however, that antihypertensive therapy not be delayed while 
patients are attempting weight loss. We favor and agree with most current guidelines 
recommendations that first-line therapy should consist of an angiotensin receptor 
blocker or an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor in combination with a cal-
cium channel blocker for patients with stage 2 hypertension. Though either drug can 
be used alone in stage 1 hypertension, we favor the use of ACE inhibitors or ARBs 
due to the ability of these drugs to target the underlying physiology. Likewise, thia-
zide diuretics appear safe in this condition, and can be substituted if the patient is 
intolerant to either of the other agents, and these agents make an ideal third drug 
addition if one is required.
We look forward to the next 40  years of research in the field of obesity and 
hypertension. Though the impact of this disease is growing, we are confident that 
new, targeted therapies that will improve outcomes are just around the corner.
References
 1. World Health Organization. Obesity: preventing and managing the global epidemic. In:  
World Health Organization; 2000.
 2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Defining overweight and obesity. https://www.
cdc.gov/obesity/adult/defining.html.
 3. Sturm R.  Increases in morbid obesity in the USA: 2000–2005. Public Health. 
2007;121(7):492–6.
 4. Kyle UG, Schutz Y , Dupertuis YM, Pichard C. Body composition interpretation: contributions 
of the fat-free mass index and the body fat mass index. Nutrition. 2003;19(7–8):597–604.
 5. Garrow JS, Webster J. Quetelet’s Index (W/H2) as a measure of fatness. Int J Obes (Lond). 
1985;9(2):147–53.
 6. Owen J, Reisin E. Non-communicable disease: a welcome and long needed addition to the 
WHO’s 2012 World Health Statistics. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2012;14(6):475–7.
 7. World Health Organizataion. World Health Statistics 2012. http://www.who.int/gho/publica-
tions/world_health_statistics/EN_WHS2012_Full.pdf.
 8. Haslam DW, James WP. Obesity. Lancet. 2005;366(9492):1197–209.
 9. Stamler R, Stamler J, Riedlinger WF, Algera G, Roberts RH. Weight and blood pressure: 
findings in hypertension screening of 1 million Americans. JAMA. 1978;240(15):1607–10.
 10. Krauss RM, Winston M, Fletcher BJ, Grundy SM. Obesity: impact on cardiovascular disease. 
Circulation. 1998;98(14):1472–6.
 11. Vague J. La differenciation sexuelle; facteur determinant des formes de l’obesite. La Presse 
Medicale. 1947;55(30):339.
 12. Kannel WB, Brand N, Skinner JJ Jr, Dawber TR, McNamara PM. The relation of adiposity 
to blood pressure and the development of hypertension: the Framingham study. Ann Intern 
Med. 1967;67(1):48–59.
 13. Matsuzawa Y , Shimomura I, Nakamura T, Keno Y , Kotani K, Tokunaga K. Pathophysiology 
and pathogenesis of visceral fat obesity. Obes Res. 1995;3(Suppl 2):S187–94.
J. Owen et al.219
 14. Hayashi T, Boyko EJ, Leonetti DL, McNeely MJ, Newell-Morris L, Kahn SE, Fujimoto 
WY . Visceral adiposity is an independent predictor of hypertension in Japanese Americans. 
Ann Intern Med. 2004;140(12):992–1000.
 15. Peiris AN, Sothmann MS, Hoffmann RG, Hennes MI, Wilson CR, Gustafson AB, 
Kissebah AH.  Adiposity, fat distribution, and cardiovascular risk. Ann Intern Med. 
1989;110(11):867–72.
 16. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, Peto R, Collins R, Prospective Studies Collaboration. 
Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of indi-
vidual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360(9349):1903–13.
 17. de Simone G, Devereux RB, Roman MJ, Alderman MH, Laragh JH. Relation of obesity and 
gender to left ventricular hypertrophy in normotensive and hypertensive adults. Hypertension. 
1994;23(5):600–6.
 18. Griffen KA.  Hypertensive kidney injury and the progression of chronic kidney disease. 
Hypertension. 2017;70:687–94.
 19. Kambham N, Markowitz GS, Valeri AM, Lin J, D’Agati VD. Obesity-related glomerulopa-
thy: an emerging epidemic. Kidney Int. 2001;59(4):1498–509.
 20. Good D, Morse SA, Ventura HO, Reisin E. Obesity, hypertension, and the heart. J Cardiometab 
Syndr. 2008;3:168–72.
 21. Morse S, Zhang R, Thakur V , Reisin E. Hypertension and the metabolic syndrome. Am J Med 
Sci. 2005;330(6):303–10.
 22. Hall JE. The kidney, hypertension, and obesity. Hypertension. 2003;41:625–33.
 23. Hall JE, Brands MW, Dixon WN, Smith MJ. Obesity induced hypertension: renal function 
and systemic hemodynamics. Hypertension. 1993;22(3):292–9.
 24. Thakur V , Morse S and Reisin E. “Functional and structural renal changes in the early stages 
of obesity” Wolf G 9ed Obesity and the Kidney Contrib. Nephrol. Basel, Karger; 2006, vol 
151, pp 135-150.
 25. Kotchen T. Obesity-related hypertension: epidemiology, pathophysiology, and clinical man-
agement. Am J Hypertens. 2010;23(11):1170–8.
 26. Segal-Lieberman G, Rosenthal T. Animal models in obesity and hypertension. Curr Hypertens 
Rep. 2013;15:190–5.
 27. DeMarco VG, Aroor AR, Sowers JR. The pathophysiology of hypertension in patients with 
obesity. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014;10:364–76.
 28. Singer GM, Setaro JF. Secondary hypertension—obesity and the metabolic syndrome. J Clin 
Hypertens. 2008;10(7):567–74.
 29. Rahmouni K, Correia MLG, Haynes WG, Mark AL. Obesity-associated hypertension: new 
insights into mechanisms. Hypertension. 2005;45:9–14.
 30. Guyton AC, Coleman TG, Cowley A V Jr, Scheel KW, Manning RD Jr, Norman RA Jr. 
Arterial pressure regulation: overriding dominance of the kidneys in long-term regulation 
and in hypertension. Am J Med. 1972;52(5):584–94.
 31. Reisin E, Messerli FG, Ventura HO, Frohich ED. Renal haemodynamic studies in obesity 
hypertension. J Hypertens. 1987;5:397–400.
 32. Reisin E, Suarez DH, Frolich ED. Haemodynamic changes associated with obesity and high 
blood pressure in rats with ventromedial hypothalamic lesions. Clin Sci. 1980;59:397s–9s.
 33. Carroll JF, Huang M, Hester RL, Cockrell KH, Mizelle L.  Hemodynamic alterations in 
hypertensive obese rabbits. Hypertension. 1995;26:465–70.
 34. Owen JG, Reisin E. Anti-hypertensive drug treatment of patients with the metabolic syn-
drome and obesity: a review of evidence, meta-analysis, post hoc and guidelines publications. 
Curr Hypertens Rep. 2015;17:46.
 35. Marcus Y , Shefer G, Stern N. Adipose tissue renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) 
and progression of insulin resistance. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013;378:1–14.
 36. Grassi G.  Sympathetic overdrive and cardiovascular risk in the metabolic syndrome. 
Hypertens Res. 2006;29:839–47.15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect220
 37. Trossi RJ, Weiss ST, Parker DR, Sparrow D, Young JB, Landsberg L. Relation of obesity and 
diet to sympathetic nervous system activity. Hypertension. 1991;17:669–77.
 38. Grassi G, Seravalle G, Cattaneo BM, Bolla GB, Lanfanchi A, Colombo M, Giannattasio C, 
Brunani A, Cavagnini F, Mancia G. Sympathetic activation in obese normotensive subjects. 
Hypertension. 1995;25:560–3.
 39. DiBona GF. Sympathetic nervous system and hypertension. Hypertension. 2013;61:556–60.
 40. Kalil GZ, Haynes WG. Sympathetic nervous system in obesity-related hypertension—mech-
anisms and clinical implications. Hypertens Res. 2012;35(1):4–16.
 41. Anderson EA, Hoffman RP, Balon TW, Sinkey CA, Mark AL. Hyperinsulinemia produces 
both sympathetic neural activation and vasodilation in normal humans. J Clin Investig. 
1991;87:2246–52.
 42. Anderson EA, Balon TW, Hoffman RP, Sinkey CA, Mark AL.  Insulin increases sympa-
thetic activity but not blood pressure in borderline hypertensive humans. Hypertension. 
1992;19(6):621–67.
 43. Reaven GM, Lithell H, Landsberg L.  Hypertension and associated metabolic abnor -
malities—the role of insulin resistance and the sympathoadrenal system. N Engl J Med. 
1996;334(6):374–81.
 44. Kazumi T, Kawaquchi A, Katoh J, Iwahashi M, Yoshino G. Fasting insulin and leptin serum 
levels are associated with systolic blood pressure independent of percentage body fat and 
body mass index. J Hypertens. 1999;17(10):1451–5.
 45. Park SE, Rhee EJ, Park CY , Oh KY , Park SW, Kim SW, Lee WY .  Impact of hyperinsu-
linemia in the development of normotensive, nondiabetic adults: a 4 year follow up study. 
Metabolism. 2013;62(4):532–8.
 46. Considine RV , Sinha MK, Heiman ML, Kriauciunas A, Stephens TW, Nyce MR, Ohannesian 
JP, Marco CC, Mckee LJ, Bauer TL, Caro JF. Serum immunoreactive-leptin concentrations 
in normal-weight and obese humans. N Engl J Med. 1996;334(5):292–5.
 47. Bravo PE, Morse S, Borne DM, Aguilar EA, Reisin E. Leptin and hypertension in obesity. 
Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2006;2(2):163–9.
 48. Collins S, Kuhn CM, Petro AE, Swick AG, Chrunyk BA, Surwit RS. Role of leptin in fat 
regulation. Nature. 1996;380(6576):677.
 49. da Silva AA, do Carmo JM, Wang Z, Hall JE. The brain melanocortin system, sympathetic 
control, and obesity hypertension. Physiology. 2014;29:196–202.
 50. Hall JE, da Silva AA, do Carmo JM, Dubinion J, Hamza S, Munusamy S, Smith G, Stec 
DE. Obesity-induced hypertension: role of sympathetic nervous system, leptin, and melano-
cortins. J Biol Chem. 2010;285(23):17,271–6.
 51. Oral EA, Simha V , Ruiz E, Andewelt A, Premkumar A, Snell P, Wanger AJ, DePaoli AM 
Reitman ML, Taylor SI, Gorden P, Garg A. Leptin-replacement therapy for lipodystrophy. N 
Engl J Med. 2002;346(8):570–80.
 52. Farooqi IS, Matarese G, Lord GM, Keogh JM, Lawrence E, Agwu C, Sanna V , Jebb SA, 
Perna F, Fontana S, Lechler RI, DePaoli AM, O’Rahily S. Beneficial effects of leptin on 
obesity, T cell hyporesponsiveness, and neuroendocrine/metabolic dysfunction of human 
congenital leptin deficiency. J Clin Investig. 2002;110(8):1093–103.
 53. Paz-Filho G, Mastronardi CA, Licinio J. Leptin treatment: facts and expectations. Metabolism. 
2015;64(1):146–56.
 54. Vatier C, Fetita S, Boudou P, Tchankou C, Deville L, Riveline J, Young J, Mathivon L, Travert 
F, Morin D, Cahen J, Lascols O, Andreeli F, Reznik Y , Mongeois E, Madeline I, Vantyghem M, 
Gautier J, Vigouroux C. One-year metreleptin improves insulin secretion in patients with dia-
betes linked to genetic lipodystrophic syndromes. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2016;18(7):693–7.
 55. Belin de Chanteme’le EJ, Mintz JD, Rainey WE, Stepp DW.  Impact of leptin-medi-
ated sympatho- activation on cardiovascular function in obese mice. Hypertension. 
2011;58:271–9.
 56. da Silva AA, Kuo JJ, Hall JE.  Role of hypothalamic melanocortin ¾-receptors in medi-
ating chronic cardiovascular, renal, and metabolic actions of leptin. Hypertension. 
2004;43(6):1312–7.
J. Owen et al.221
 57. Tallam LS, da Silva AA, Hall JE. Melanocortin-4 receptor mediates chronic cardiovascular 
and metabolic actions of leptin. Hypertension. 2006;48(1):58–64.
 58. do Carmo JM, da Silva AA, Cai Z, Lin S, Dubinion JH, Hall JE. Control of blood pres-
sure, appetite, and glucose in mice lacking leptin receptors in proopiomelanocortin neurons. 
Hypertension. 2011;57(5):918–26.
 59. Shek EW, Brands MW, Hall JE.  Chronic leptin infusion increases arterial pressure. 
Hypertension. 1998;31:409–14.
 60. Aizawa-Abe M, Ogawa Y , Masuzaki H, Ebihara K, Satoh N, Iwai H, Matsuoka N, Hayashi 
T, Hosoda K, Inoue G, Yoshimasa Y , Nakao K. Pathophysiological role of leptin in obesity- 
related hypertension. J Clin Investig. 2000;105:1243–52.
 61. Somers VK, Dyken ME, Clary MP, Abboud FM.  Sympathetic neural mechanisms in 
 obstructive sleep apnea. J Clin Invest. 1995;96:1897–904.
 62. Calhoun DA.  Obstructive sleep apnea and hypertension. Curr Hypertens Rep. 
2010;12:189–95.
 63. Borgel J, Sanner BM, Keskin F, Bittlinsky A, Bartels NK, Buchner N, Huesing A, Rump 
LC, Mugge A. Obstructive sleep apnea and blood pressure: Interaction between the blood 
pressure-lowering effects of positive airway pressure therapy and antihypertensive drugs. Am 
J Hypertens. 2004;17:1081–7.
 64. Dudenbostel T, Calhoun DA. Resistant hypertension, obstructive sleep apnoea, and aldoste-
rone. J Hum Hypertens. 2012;26(5):281–7.
 65. Abdel-Kader K, Dohar S, Shah N, Jhamb M, Reis SE, Strollo P, Buysse D, Unruh 
ML. Resistant hypertension and obstructive sleep apnea in the setting of kidney disease. J 
Hypertens. 2012;30(5):960–6.
 66. Owen J, Reisin E. Obstructive sleep apnea and hypertension: is the primary link simply vol-
ume overload. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2013;15:131–3.
 67. Karlsson C, Lindell K, Ottosson M, Sjostrom L, Carlsson B, Carlsson LM. Human adipose 
tissue expresses angiotensinogen and enzymes required for its conversion to angiotensin II. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metabol. 1998;83(11):3925–9.
 68. Engeli S, Gorzelniak K, Kreutz R, Runkel N, Distler A, Sharma AM. Co-expression of renin- 
angiotensin system genes in human adipose tissue. J Hypertens. 1999;17(4):555–60.
 69. Achard V , Boullu-Ciocca S, Desbriere R, Nguyen G, Grino M. Renin receptor expression in 
human adipose tissue. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2007;292(1):R274–82.
 70. Kouyama R, Suganami T, Nishida J, Tanaka M, Toyoda T, Kiso M, Chiwata T, Miyamoto 
Y , Yoshimasa Y , Fukamizu A, Horiuchi M, Hirata Y , Ogawa Y . Attenuation of diet-induced 
weight gain and adiposity through increased energy expenditure in mice lacking angiotensin 
II type 1a receptor. Endocrinology. 2005;146(8):3481–9.
 71. Yvan-Charvet L, Even P, Bloch-Faure M, Guerre-Millo M, Moustaid-Moussa N, Ferre P, 
Quignard-Boulange A.  Deletion of the angiotensin type 2 receptor (AT2R) reduces adi-
pose cell size and protects from diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance. Diabetes. 
2005;54:991–9.
 72. Massiera F, Seydoux J, Geloen A, Quignard-Boulange A, Turban S, Saint-Marc P, Fukamizu 
A, Negrel R, Ailhaud G, Teboul M. Angiotensinogen-deficient mice exhibit impairment of 
diet-induced weight gain with alteration in adipose tissue development and increased loco-
motor activity. Endocrinology. 2001;142(12):5220–5.
 73. Massiera F, Bloch-Faure M, Ceiler D, Murakami K, Fukamizu A, Gasc JM, Quignard- 
Boulange A, Negrel R, Ailhaud G, Seydoux J, Meneton P, Teboul M.  Adipose angioten-
sinogen is involved in adipose tissue growth and blood pressure regulation. FASEB J. 
2001;15(14):2727–9.
 74. Yiannikouris F, Gupte M, Putnam K, Thatcher S, Charnigo R, Rateri DL, Daugherty A, 
Cassis LA. Adipocyte deficiency of angiotensinogen prevents obesity-induced hypertension 
in male mice. Hypertension. 2012;60:1524–30.
 75. Hosogai N, Fukuhara A, Oshima K, Miyata Y , Tanaka S, Segawa K, Furukawa S, Tochino Y , 
Komuro R, Matsuda M, Shimomura I. Adipose tissue hypoxia and its impact on adipocyto-
kine dysregulation. Diabetes. 2007;56:901–11.15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect222
 76. Wree A, Mayer A, Westphal S, Beilfuss A, Canbay A, Schick RR, Gerken G, Vaupel 
P. Adipokine expression in brown and white adipocytes in response to hypoxia. J Endocrinol 
Invest. 2012;35(5):522–7.
 77. Yasue S, Masuzaki H, Okada S, Ishii T, Kozuka C, Tanaka T, Fujikura J, Ebihara K, Hosoda 
K, Katsurada A, Ohashi N, Urushihara M, Kobori H, Morimoto N, Kawazoe T, Naitoh M, 
Okada M, Sakaue H, Suzuki S, Nakao K. Adipose tissue-specific regulation of angiotensino-
gen in obese humans and mice: impact of nutritional status and adipocyte hypertrophy. Am J 
Hypertens. 2010;23(4):425–31.
 78. Yvan-Charvet L, Quignard-Boulange A. Role of adipose tissue renin-angiotensin system in 
metabolic and inflammatory diseases associated with obesity. Kidney Int. 2011;79:162–8.
 79. Van Harmelen V , Ariapart P, Hoffstedt J, Lundkvist I, Bringman S, Arner P. Increased adipose 
angiotensinogen gene expression in human obesity. Obes Res. 2000;8(4):337–41.
 80. Foster MC, Hwang SJ, Porter SA, Massaro JM, Hoffmann U, Fox CS.  Fatty kidney, 
hypertension, and chronic kidney disease: the Framingham Heart Study. Hypertension. 
2011;58:784–90.
 81. Chandra A, Neeland IJ, Berry JD, Ayers CR, Rohatgi A, Das SR, Khera A, McGuire DK, de 
Lemos JA, Turer AT. The relationship of body mass and fat distribution with incident hyper -
tension: observations from the Dallas Heart Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:997–1002.
 82. Briones AM, Nguyen Dinh Cat A, Callera GE, Yogi A, Burger D, He Y , Correa JW, Gagnon 
AM, Gomez-Sanchez CE, Gomez-Sanchez EP, Sorisky A, Ooi TC, Ruzicka M, Burns 
KD, Touyz RM. Adipocytes produce aldosterone through calcineurin-dependent signaling 
pathways: implications in diabetes mellitus-associated obesity and vascular dysfunction. 
Hypertension. 2012;59:1069–78.
 83. Engeli S, Bohnke J, Gorzelniak K, Janke J, Schling P, Bader M, Luft FC, Sharma AM. Weight 
loss and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Hypertension. 2005;45(3):356–62.
 84. Dubenostel T, Ghazi L, Liu M, Li P, Oparil S, Calhoun DA.  Body mass index predicts 
24-hour urinary aldosterone levels in patients with resistant hypertension. Hypertension. 
2015;68(4):995–1003.
 85. Laffin LJ, Majewski C, Liao C, Bakris G. Relationship between obesity, hypertension, and 
aldosterone production in postmenopausal Africa American Women: a pilot study. J Clin 
Hypertens. 2016;18(12):1216–21.
 86. Goodfriend TL, Egan BM, Kelley DE.  Aldosterone in obesity. Endocr Res. 
1998;24(3):789–96.
 87. Rossi GP, Belfiore A, Bernini G, Fabris B, Caridi G, Ferri C, Giacchetti G, Letizia C, Maccario 
M, Mannelli M, Palumbo G, Patalano A, Rizzoni D, Rossi E, Pessina AC, Mantero F, Primary 
Aldosteronism Prevalence in Hypertension Study Investigators. Body mass index predicts 
plasma aldosterone concentrations in overweight-obese primary hypertensive patients. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metabol. 2008;93(7):2566–71.
 88. Brown NJ. Contribution of aldosterone to cardiovascular and renal inflammation and fibrosis. 
Nat Rev Nephrol. 2013;9(8):459–69.
 89. Huby AC, Antonova G, Groenendyk J, Gomez-Sanchez CE, Bollaq WB, Filosa JA, Belin 
de Chanemele EJ.  Adipocyte-derived hormone leptin is a direct regulator of aldoste-
rone secretion, which promotes endothelial dysfunction and cardiac fibrosis. Circulation. 
2015;132(22):2134–45.
 90. Buglioni A, Cannone V , Sangaralingham SJ, Heublein DM, Scott CG, Bailey KR, Rodeheffer 
RJ, Sarzani R, Burnett JC. Aldosterone predicts cardiovascular, renal and metabolic disease 
in the general community: a 4-year follow up. J Am Heart Assoc. 2015;4(12):pii: e002505.
 91. de Souza F, Muxfeldt E, Fiszman R, Salles G. Efficacy of spironolactone therapy in patients 
with true resistant hypertension. Hypertension. 2010;55:147–52.
 92. Henegar JR, Zhang Y , De Rama R, Hata C, Hall ME, Hall JE.  Catheter based radiofre-
quency renal denervation lowers blood pressure in obese hypertensive dogs. Am J Hypertens. 
2014;27(10):1285–92.
 93. Bhatt DL, Kandzari DE, O’Neill WW, D’Agostino R, Flack JM, Katzen BT, Leon MB, Liu 
M, Mauri L, Negoita M, Coehn SA, Oparil S, Rocha-Singh K, Townsend RR, Bakris GL, 
J. Owen et al.223
Symplicity HTN-3 Investigators. A controlled trial of renal denervation for resistant hyper -
tension. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(15):1393–401.
 94. Coppolino G, Pisano A, Rivoli L, Bolignano D. Renal denervation for resistant hypertension. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;2:CD011499.
 95. Wofford MR, Anerson DC Jr, Brown CA, Jones DW, Miller ME, Hall JE. Antihypertensive 
effect of alpha- and beta- adrenergic blockade in obese and lean hypertensive subjects. Am J 
Hypertens. 2001;14(7):694–8.
 96. Lilleness BM, Frishman WH.  Ghrelin and the cardiovascular system. Cardiol Rev. 
2016;24:288–97.
 97. Lambert E, Lamber G, Ika-Sari C, Dawood T, Lee K, Chopra R, Straznicky N, Eikelis 
N, Drew S, Tilbrook A, Dixon J, Esler M, Schlaich MP.  Ghrelin modulates sympathetic 
nervous system activity and stress response in lean and overweight men. Hypertension. 
2011;58(1):43–50.
 98. Tschop M, Weyer C, Tataranni PA, Devanarayan V , Rayussin E, Heiman ML. Circulating 
ghrelin levels are decreased in human obesity. Diabetes. 2001;50:707–9.
 99. Wang Y , Liu J. Plasma ghrelin modulation in gastric band operation and sleeve gastrectomy. 
Obes Surg. 2009;19:357–62.
 100. Hady HR, Golaszewski P, Zbucki RL, Dadan J.  The influence of laparoscopic adjustable 
gastric banding and laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy on weight loss, plasma ghrelin, insulin, 
glucose and lipis. Folia Histochem Cytobiol. 2012;50:292–303.
 101. Sista F, Abruzzese V , Clementi M, Carandina S, Amicucci G.  Effect of resected gas-
tric volume of ghrelin and GLP-1 plasma levels: a prospective study. J Gastrointest Surg. 
2016;20:1931–41.
 102. Owen JG, Yazdi F, Reisin E.  Bariatric surgery and hypertension. Am J Hypertens. 
2017;31:11–7. Epub ahead of print. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajh/hpx112.
 103. Baggio LL, Drucker DJ.  Biology of incretins: GLP-1 and GIP.  Gastroenterology. 
2007;132(6):2137–57.
 104. Wang B, Zhong J, Lin H, Zhao Z, Yan Z, He H, Ni Y , Liu D, Zhu Z. Blood pressure- lowering 
effects of GLP-1 receptor agonists exenatide and liraglutide: a meta-analysis of clinical trials. 
Diabetes Obes Metab. 2013;15(8):737–49.
 105. Goud A, Zhong J, Peters M, Brook RD, Rajagopalan S. GLP-1 agonists and blood pressure: 
a review of the evidence. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2016;18(2):16.
 106. Okerson T, Yan P, Stonehouse A, Brodows R. Effects of exenatide on systolic blood pressure 
in subjects with type 2 diabetes. Am J Hypertens. 2010;23(3):334–9.
 107. Robinson LE, Holt TA, Rees K, Randeva HS, O’Hare JP. Effects of exenatide and liraglutide 
on heart rate, blood pressure and body weight: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 
Open. 2013;3(1):e001986.
 108. Krisai P, Aeschbacher S, Schoen T, Bossard M, van der Stouwe JG, Dorig L, Todd J, Estis J, 
Risch M, Risch L, Conen D. Glucgon-like peptide-1 and blood pressure in young and healthy 
adults from the general population. Hypertension. 2015;65:306–12.
 109. Yamamoto H, Lee CH, Marcus JN, Williams TD, Overton JM, Lopez ME, Hollenberg AN, 
Baggio L, Saper CB, Drucker DJ, Elmquist JK. Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor stimulation 
increases blood pressure and heart rate and activates autonomic regulatory neurons. J Clin 
Investig. 2002;110(1):43–52.
 110. Barragan JM, Rodriguez RE, Blazquez E.  Changes in arterial blood pressure and 
heart rate induced by glucagon-like peptide-1-(7-36) amide in rats. Am J Physiol. 
1994;266(3):459–66.
 111. Kim M, Platt MJ, Shibasaki T, Quaggin SE, Backx PH, Seino S, Simpson JA, Drucker 
DJ. GLP-1 receptor activation and Epac2 link atrial natriuretic peptide secretion to control of 
blood pressure. Nat Med. 2013;19(5):567–75.
 112. Takahashi N, Anan F, Nakagawa M, Yufu K, Shinohara T, Tsubone T, Goto K, Masaki T, 
Katsuragi I, Tanaka K, Kakuma T, Hara M, Saikawa T, Yoshimatus H. Hypoadiponectinemia 
in type 2 diabetes mellitus in men is associated with sympathetic overactivity as evaluated by 
cardiac 123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy. Metabolism. 2007;56(7):919–24.15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect224
 113. Vasunta RL, Kesaniemi YA, Ukkola O. Plasma adiponectin concentration is associated with 
ambulatory daytime systolic blood pressure but not with the dipping status. J Hum Hypertens. 
2010;24(8):545–51.
 114. Kim DH, Kim C, Ding EL, Townsend MK, Lipsitz LA. Adiponectin levels and the risk of 
hypertension: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hypertension. 2013;62(1):27–32.
 115. Reisin E, Abel R, Modan M, Silverberg DS, Eliahou HE, Modan B. Effect of weight loss 
without salt restriction on the reduction of blood pressure in overweight hypertensive patients. 
N Engl J Med. 1978;298(1):1–6.
 116. Dansigner ML, Gleason JA, Giffith JL, Selker HP, Schaefer EJ. Comparison of the Atkins, 
Ornish, Weight Watchers, and Zone diets for weight loss and heart disease risk reduction: a 
randomized trial. JAMA. 2005;293(1):43–5.
 117. Straznicky NE, Lambert EA, Lambert GW, Masu K, Esler MD, Nestel PJ. Effects of dietary 
weight loss on sympathetic activity and cardiac risk factors associated with the metabolic 
syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metabol. 2005;90(11):5998–6005.
 118. Busetto L, Sergi G, Enzi G, Segato G, De Marchi F, Foletto M, De Luca M, Pigozzo S, 
Favretti F. Short-term effects of weight loss on the cardiovascular risk factors in morbidly 
obese patients. Obes Res. 2004;12(8):1256–63.
 119. McTigue KM, Harris R, Hemphill B, Lux L, Sutton S, Bunton AJ, Lohr KN.  Screening 
and interventions for obesity in adults: summary of the evidence for the U.S. Preventative 
Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2003;139(11):933–49.
 120. Esposito K, Pontillo A, Di Palo C, Giugliano G, Masella M, Marfella R, Giugliano D. Effect 
of weight loss and lifestyle changes on vascular inflammatory markers in obese women: a 
randomized trial. JAMA. 2003;289(14):1799–804.
 121. Miller ER 3rd, Erlinger TP, Young DR, Jehn M, Charleston J, Rhodes D, Wasan SK, Appel 
LJ. Results of the diet, exercise and weight loss intervention trial (DEW-It). Hypertension. 
2002;40(5):612–8.
 122. Dalle Grave R, Melchionda N, Calugi S, Centis E, Tufano A, Fatati G, Fusco MA, Marchesini 
G. Countinues care in the treatment of obesity: an observational multicenter study. J Intern 
Med. 2005;258(3):265–73.
 123. Sundstrom J, Bruze G, Ottosson J, Marcus C, Naslund I, Neovius M. Weight loss and heart 
failure: a nationwide study of gastric bypass surgery versus intensive lifestyle treatment. 
Circulation. 2017;135(17):1577–85.
 124. Motesi L, El Goch M, Brodosi L, Calugi S, Marchesini G, Dalle Grave R. Long-term weight 
loss maintenance for obesity: a multidisciplinary approach. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 
2017;9:37–46.
 125. Bloch AS. Low carbohydrate diets, pro: time to rethink our current strategies. Nutr Clin Pract. 
2005;20(1):3–12.
 126. Verheggen RJHM, Maessen MFH, Green DJ, Hermus ARMM, Hopman MTE, Thijssen 
DHT.  A systematic review and meta-analysis on the effects of exercise training versus 
hypocaloric diet: distinct effects on body weight and visceral adipose tissue. Obes Rev. 
2016;17(8):664–90.
 127. Ismail I, Keating SE, Baker MK, Johnson NA.  A systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis of the effect of aerobic vs. resistance exercise training on visceral fat. Obes Rev. 
2011;13:68–91.
 128. Goodpaster BH, Delany JP, Otto AD, Kuller L, V ockley J, South-Paul JE, Thomas SB, Brown 
J, McTigue K, Hames KC, Lang W, Jakicic JM. Effects of diet and physical activity interven-
tions on weight loss and cardiometabolic risk factors in severely obese adults: a randomized 
trial. JAMA. 2010;304(16):1795–802.
 129. Slentz CA, Bateman LA, Willis LH, Granville EO, Pinner LW, Samsa GP, Setji TL, 
Muehlbauer MJ, Huffman KM, Bales CW, Kraus WE. Effects of exercise training alone vs 
a combined exercise and nutritional lifestyle intervention on glucose homeostasis in predia-
betic individuals: a randomized controlled trial. Diabetologia. 2016;59:2088–98.
J. Owen et al.225
 130. Neter JE, Stam BE, Kok FJ, Grobbee DE, Geleijnse JM. Influence of weight reduction on blood 
pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Hypertension. 2003;42:878–84.
 131. Staessen J, Fagard R, Amery A. The relationship between body weight and blood pressure. J 
Hum Hypertens. 1988;2(4):207–17.
 132. Aucott L, Poobalan A, Smith WCS, Avenell A, Jung R, Broom J.  Effects of weight loss 
in overweight/obese individuals and long-term hypertension outcomes: a systematic review. 
Hypertension. 2005;45:1035–41.
 133. Aucott L, Rothnie H, McIntyre L, Thapa M, Waweru C, Gray D. Long-term weight loss from life-
style intervention benefits blood pressure: a systemtatic review. Hypertension. 2009;54:756–62.
 134. Semlitsch T, Jeitler K, Berghold A, Horvath K, Posch N, Poggenburg S, Siebenhofer A. Long- 
term effects of weight-reducing diets in people with hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2016;3:CD008274.
 135. Appel LJ, Moore TJ, Obarzanek E, V ollmer WM, Svetkey LP, Sacks FM, Bray GA, V ogt 
TM, Cutler JA, Windhauser MM, Lin PH, Karanja N, For the DASH Collaborative Research 
Group. A clinical trial of the effects of dietary patterns on blood pressure. N Engl J Med. 
1997;336(16):1117–24.
 136. Lin PH, Allen JD, Li YJ, Yu M, Lien L, Svetky LP. Blood pressure-lowering mechanisms of 
the DASH dietary pattern. J Nutr Metab. 2012;2012:472396.
 137. McGregor RA, Poppitt SD. Milk protein for improved metabolic health: a review of the evi-
dence. Nutr Metab. 2013;10:46.
 138. Blumenthal JA, Babyak MA, Hinderliter A, Watkins LL, Craighead L, Lin PH, Caccia C, 
Johnson J, Waugh R, Sherwood A.  Effects of the DASH diet alone and in combination 
with exercise and weight loss on blood pressure and cardiovascular biomarkers in men and 
women: the ENCORE study. Arch Intern Med. 2010;170(2):126–35.
 139. Blumenthal JA, Babyak MA, Sherwood A, Craighead L, Lin PH, Johnson J, Watkins LL, 
Wang JT, Kuhn C, Feinglos M, Hinderliter A. Effects of the dietary approaches to stop hyper -
tension diet alone and in combination with exercise and caloric restriction on insulin sensitiv-
ity and lipids. Hypertension. 2010;55:1199–205.
 140. Shirani F, Salehi-Abargouei A, Azadbakht L. Effects of dietary approaches to stop hyperten-
sion (DASH) diet on some risk for developing type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis on controlled clinical trials. Nutrition. 2013;29:939–47.
 141. Trichopoulou A, Costacou T, Bamia C, Trichopoulos D. Adherence to a Mediterranean diet 
and survival in a Greek population. N Engl J Med. 2003;348(26):2599–608.
 142. Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvado J, Covas MI, Corella D, Aros F, Gomez-Gracia E, Ruiz- 
Gutierrez V , Fiol M, Lapetra J, Lamuela-Raventos RM, Serra-Majem L, Pinto X, Basora J, 
Munoz MA, Soril JV , Martinez JA, Martinez-Gonzalez MA, PREDIMED Study Investigators. 
Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease with a Mediterranean diet. N Engl J Med. 
2013;368(14):1279–90.
 143. Domenech M, Roman P, Lapetra J, de la Corte FJ G, Sala-Vila A, de la Torre R, Corella D, 
Salas-Salvado J, Ruiz-Gutierrez V , Lamuela-Raventos RM, Toledo E, Estruch R, Coca A, 
Ros E. Mediterranean diet reduces 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure, blood glucose, and 
lipids: one-year randomized, clinical trial. Hypertension. 2014;64:69–76.
 144. Toledo E, Hu FB, Estruch R, Buil-Cosiales P, Corella D, Salas-Salvado J, Covas MI, Aros 
F, Gomez-Gracia E, Fiol M, Lapetra J, Serra-Majem L, Pinto X, Lamuela-Raventos RM, 
Saez G, Bullo M, Ruiz-Gutierrez V , Ros E, Sorli JV , Martinez-Gonzalez MA. Effect of the 
Mediterranean diet on blood pressure in the PREDIMED trial: results from a randomized 
controlled trial. BMC Med. 2013;11:207.
 145. Gay HC, Rao SG, Vaccarino V , Ali MK. Effects of different dietary interventions on blood 
pressure: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Hypertension. 
2016;67:733–9.
 146. St Jeor ST, Howard BV , Prewitt TE, Boyee V , Bazzare T, Eckel RH, Nutrition Committee 
of the Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism of the American Heart 
Association. Dietary protein and weight reduction: a statement for healthcare professionals 15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect226
from the Nutrition Committee of the Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism 
of the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2001;104(15):1869–74.
 147. Friedman AN, Ogden LG, Foster GD, Klein S, Stein R, Miller B, Hill JO, Brill C, Bailer B, 
Rosenbaum DR, Wyatt HR.  Comparative effects of low-carbohydrate high protein versus 
low-fat diets on the kidney. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012;7(7):1103–11.
 148. Brinkworth GD, Buckley JD, Noakes M, Clifton PM. Renal function following long-term 
weight loss in individuals with abdominal obesity on a very-low-carbohydrte diet vs high 
carbohydrate diet. J Am Diet Assoc. 2010;110(4):633–8.
 149. Samaha FF, Iqbal N, Seshadri P, Chicano KL, Daily DA, McGrory J, Williams T, Williams M, 
Gracely EJ, Stern L. A low-carbohydrate as compared with a low-fat diet in severe obesity. N 
Engl J Med. 2003;348:2074–81.
 150. Foster GD, Wyatt HR, Hill JO, McGuckin BG, Brill C, Mohammed S, Szapary PO, Rader DJ, 
Edman JS, Klein S. A randomized trial of a low-carbohydrate diet for obesity. N Engl J Med. 
2003;348:2082–90.
 151. Stern L, Iqbal N, Seshadri P, Chicano KL, Daily DA, McGrory J, Williams M, Gracely EJ, 
Samaha FF. The effects of low-carbohydrate versus conventional weight loss diets in severely 
obese adults—one year follow-up of a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2004;140:778–85.
 152. Yancy WS Jr, Olsen MK, Guyton JR, Bakst RP, Westman EC. A low-carbohydrate, keto-
genic diet versus a low-fat diet to treat obesity and hyperlipidemia. Ann Intern Med. 
2004;140:769–77.
 153. Farnsworth E, Luscombe ND, Noakes M, Wittert G, Argyiou E, Clifton PM.  Effect of a 
high-protein, energy-restricted diet on body composition, glycemic control, and lipid con-
centrations in overweight and obese hyperinsulinemic men and women. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2003;78:31–9.
 154. Brehm BJ, Seely RJ, Daniels SR, D’Alessio DA. A randomized trial comparing a very low 
carbohydrate diet and a calorie-restricted low fat diet on body weight and cardiovascular risk 
factors in healthy women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88:1617–23.
 155. Engberink MF, Geleijnse JM, Bakker SJL, Larsen TM, Handjieva-Darlesnka T, Kafatos A, 
Martinez JA, Pfeiffer AFH. Effect of a high-protein diet on maintenance of blood pressure 
levels achieved after initial weight loss: the DiOGenes randomized study. J Hum Hypertens. 
2015;29:58–63.
 156. Appel LJ, Sacks FM, Carey VJ, Obarzanek E, Swain JF, Miller ER 3rd, Conlin PR, Erlinger 
TP, Rosner BA, Laranio NM, Charleston J, McCarron P, Bihop LM, OmniHeart Collaborative 
Research Group. Effects of protein, monounsaturated fat, and carbohydrate intake on blood 
pressure and serum lipids. JAMA. 2005;294(19):2455–64.
 157. Oyabu C, Hashimoto Y , Fukuda T, Tanaka M, Asano M, Yamazaki M, Fukui M. Impact of 
low-carbohydrate diet on renal function: a meta-analysis of over 1000 individuals from nine 
randomized controlled trials. Br J Nutr. 2016;116:632–8.
 158. Siebenhofer A, Jeitler K, Horvath K, Berghold A, Posch N, Meschik J, Semlitsch T. Long- 
term effects of weight-reducing drugs in people with hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2016;3:CD007654.
 159. Buchwald H, Avidor Y , Braunwald E, Jensen MD, Pories W, Fahrbach K, Schoelles 
K. Bariatric surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 2004;292(14):1724–37.
 160. Mingrone G, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, Guidone C, Iaconelli A, Leccessi L, Nanni G, Pomp 
A, Castagneto M, Ghirlanda G, Rubino F.  Bariatric surgery versus conventional medical 
therapy for type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(17):1577–85.
 161. Schauer PR, Bhatt DL, Kirwan JP, Wolski K, Brethauer SA, Navaneethan SD, Aminian 
A, Pothier CE, Kim ES, Nissen SE, Kashyap SR, Investigators STAMPEDE.  Bariatric 
surgery versus intensive medical therapy for diabetes—3 year outcomes. N Engl J Med. 
2014;370(21):2002–13.
 162. Schauer PR, Bhatt DL, Kirwan JP, Wolski K, Aminian A, Brethauer SA, Navaneethan 
SD, Singh RP, Pothier CE, Nissen SE, Kashyap SR, STAMPEDE Investigators. Bariatric 
surgery versus intensive medical therapy for diabetes—5-year outcomes. N Engl J Med. 
2017;376(7):641–51.
J. Owen et al.227
 163. Sjöström L, Lindroos AK, Peltonen M, Torgerson J, Bouchard C, Carlsson B, Dahlgren S, 
Larsson B, Narbro K, Sjöström CD, Sullivan M, Wedel H, Swedish Obese Subjects Study 
Scientific Group. Lifestyle, diabetes, and cardiovascular risk factors 10 years after bariatric 
surgery. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2683–93.
 164. Hallersund P, Sjöström L, Olbers T, Lönroth H, Jacobson P, Wallenius V , Näslund I, Carlsson 
LM, Fändriks L. Gastric bypass surgery is followed by lowered blood pressure and increased 
diuresis  - long term results from the Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS) study. PLoS One. 
2012;7:e49696.
 165. Sarkhosh K, Birch DW, Shi X, Gill RS, Karmali S. The impact of sleeve gastrectomy on 
hypertension: a systematic review. Obes Surg. 2012;22:832–7.
 166. Ricci C, Gaeta M, Rausa E, Asti E, Bandera F, Bonavina L. Long-term effects of bariatric 
surgery on type II diabetes, hypertension and hyperlipidemia: a meta-analysis and meta- 
regression study with 5-year follow-up. Obes Surg. 2015;25:397–405.
 167. Wilhelm SM, Young J, Kale-Pradhan PB. Effect of bariatric surgery onhypertension: a meta- 
analysis. Ann Pharmacother. 2014;48:674–82.
 168. Vest AR, Heneghan HM, Agarwal S, Schauer PR, Young JB. Bariatric surgery and cardiovas-
cular outcomes: a systematic review. Heart. 2012;98:1763–77.
 169. Heneghan HM, Meron-Eldar S, Brethauer SA, Schauer PR, Young JB. Effect of bariatric 
surgery on cardiovascular risk profile. Am J Cardiol. 2011;108:1499–507.
 170. Courcoulas AP, Christian NJ, Belle SH, Berk PD, Flum DR, Garcia L, Horlick M, Kalarchian 
MA, King WC, Mitchell JE, Patterson EJ, Pendler JR, Pomp A, Pories WJ, Thirlby RC, 
Yanovski SZ, Wolfe BM, Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS) Consortium. 
Weight change and health outcomes at 3 years after bariatric surgery among individuals with 
severe obesity. JAMA. 2013;310:2416–25.
 171. Mechanick JI, Youdim A, Jones DB, Garvey WT, Hurley DL, McMahon MM, Heinberg 
LJ, Kushner R, Adams TD, Shikora S, Dixon JB, Brethauer S. Clinical practice guidelines 
for the perioperative nutritional, metabolic, and nonsurgical support of the bariatric surgery 
patient—2013 update: cosponsored by American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, 
the Obesity Society, and American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery. Obesity. 
2013;21(Supplement 1):S1–27.
 172. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, Jones DW, 
Materson BJ, Oparil S, Wright JT Jr, Roccella EJ, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High 
Blood Pressure, National High Blood Pressure Education Program Coordinating Committee. 
The seventh report of the joint national committee on prevention, detection, evaluation and 
treatment of high blood pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003;289(19):2560–72.
 173. Amery A, Berthaux P, Bulpitt C, Deruyttere M, de Schaepdryver A, Dollery C, Fagard R, 
Forette F, Hellemans J, Lund-Johansen P, Mutsers A, Tuomilehto J. Glucose intolerance dur -
ing diuretic therapy: results of trial by the European working party on hypertension in the 
elderly. Lancet. 1978;1(8066):681–3.
 174. Plavinik FL, Rodrigues C, Zanella MT, Ribeiro AB. Hypokalemia, glucose intolerance, and 
hyperinsulinemia during diuretic therapy. Hypertension. 1992;19(2 suppl):26–9.
 175. Harper R, Ennis CN, Heaney AP, Sheridan B, Gormley M, Atkinson AB, Johnston GD, Bell 
PM. A comparison of the effects of low and conventional dose thiazide diuretic on insulin 
action in hypertensive patients with NIDDM. Diabetologia. 1995;38(7):853–9.
 176. Punzi HA, Punzi CF.  Antihypertensive and lipid-lowering heart attack trial study; trinity 
hypertension research institute. Metabolic issues in the antihypertensive and lipid-lowering 
heart attack trial study. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2004;6(2):106–10.
 177. Harper R, Ennis CN, Sheridan B, Atkinson AB, Johnston GD, Bell PM. Effects of low dose 
versus conventional dose thiazide diuretic on insulin action in essential hypertension. Br Med 
J. 1994;309(6949):226–30.
 178. ALLHAT Officers and Coordinators for the ALLHAT Collaborative Research Group, The 
Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial. Major out-
comes in high-risk hypertensive patients randomized to angiotensin-converting enzyme 15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect228
inhibitor or calcium channel blocker vs diuretic: the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering 
Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT). JAMA. 288(23):2002, 2981.
 179. Reisin E, Weir MR, Falkner B, Hutchinson HG, Anzalone DA, Tuck ML. Lisinopril versus 
hydrochlorothiazide in obese hypertensive patients: a multicenter placebo-controlled trial. For 
the Treatment in Obese Patients with Hypertension (TROPHY) study group. Hypertension. 
1997;30(1):140–5.
 180. Barzilay JI, Davis BR, Cutler JA, Pressel SL, Whelton PK, Basile J, Margolis KL, Ong ST, 
Sadler LS, Summerson J, ALLHAT Collaborative Research Group. Fasting glucose levels 
and incident diabetes mellitus in older nondiabetic adults randomized to receive 3 different 
classes of antihypertensive treatment: a report from the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering 
Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT). Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(2):2191–201.
 181. Black HR, Davis B, Barzilay J, Nwachuku C, Baimbridge C, Marginean H, Wright JT Jr, 
Basile J, Wong ND, Whelton P, Dart RA, Thadani U, Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering 
Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial. Metabolic and clinical outcomes in nondiabetic indi-
viduals with the metabolic syndrome assigned to chlorthalidone, amlodipine, or Lisinopril 
as initial treatment for hypertension: a report from the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering 
treatment to prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT). Diabetes Care. 2008;31(2):353–60.
 182. Barzilay JI, Davis BR, Pressel SL, Cutler JA, Einhorn PT, Black HR, Cushman WC, Ford 
CE, Margolis KL, Moloo J, Oparil S, Piller LB, Simmons DL, Sweeney ME, Whelton PK, 
Wong ND, Wright JT Jr, ALLHAT Collaborative Research Group. Long-term effects of inci-
dent diabetes mellitus on cardiovascular outcomes in people treated for hypertension: the 
ALLHAT diabetes extension study. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2012;5(2):153–62.
 183. Rapoport MI, Hurd HF. Thiazide-induced glucose intolerance treated with potassium. Arch 
Intern Med. 1964;113:405–8.
 184. Helderman JH, Elahi D, Andersen DK, Raizes GS, Tobin JD, Shocken D, Andres R. Prevention 
of the glucose intolerance of thiazide diuretics by maintenance of body potassium. Diabetes. 
1983;32(2):106–11.
 185. Reisin E, Graves JW, Yamal JM, Barzilay JI, Pressel SL, Einhorn PT, Dart RA, Retta TM, 
Saklayen MG, Davis BR, ALLHAT Collaborative Research Group. Blood pressure control 
and cardiovascular outcomes in normal-weight, overweight, and obese hypertensive patients 
treated with three different antihypertensives in ALLHAT. J Hypertens. 2014;32(7):1503–13.
 186. Kintscher U, Bramlage P, Paar WD, Thoenes M, Unger T. Irbesartan for the treatment of 
hypertension in patients with the metabolic syndrome: a sub analysis of the treat to target 
post authorization survey. Prospective, observational two armed study in 14,200 patients. 
Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2007;6:12.
 187. Benson SC, Pershadsingh HA, Ho CI, Chittiboyina A, Desai P, Prevenec M, Qi N, Wang J, 
Avery MA, Kurtz TW. Identification of telmisartan as a unique angiotensin II receptor antago-
nist with selective PPAR gamma modulating activities. Hypertension. 2004;43(5):993–1002.
 188. Schupp M, Janke J, Clasen R, Unger T, Kintsher U.  Angiotensin type I receptor block-
ers induce peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma activity. Circulation. 
2004;109(17):2054–7.
 189. Zappe DH, Sowers JR, Hsueh WA, Haffner SM, Deedwania PC, Fonseca V A, Keeling L, 
Sica DA. Metabolic and antihypertensive effects of combined angiotensin receptor blocker 
and diuretic therapy in Prediabetic hypertensive patients with the cardiometabolic syndrome. 
J Clin Hypertens. 2008;10(12):894–903.
 190. Niskanen L, Hedner T, Hanson L, Lanke J, Niklason A, CAPPP Study Group. Reduced car -
diovascular morbidity and mortality in hypertensive diabetic patients on first-line therapy 
with an ACE inhibitor compared with a diuretic/β-blocker-based Treatment Regimen: a sub-
analysis of the captopril prevention project. Diabetes Care. 2001;24:2091–6.
 191. Gress TW, Nieto FJ, Shahar E, Wofford MR, Brancati FL. Hypertension and antihypertensive 
therapy as risk factors for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Atherosclerosis risk in communities study. 
N Engl J Med. 2000;342:905–12.
 192. Dahlof B, Devereux RB, Kjeldsen SE, Julius S, Beevers G, de Faire U, Fyhrquist F, Ibsen 
H, Kristiansson K, Lederballe-Pedersen O, Lindholm LH, Nieminen MS, Omvik P, Oparil 
J. Owen et al.229
S, Wedel H, LIFE Study Group. Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in the Losartan 
Intervention for Endpoint reduction in hypertension study (LIFE): a randomized trial against 
atenolol. Lancet. 2002;359:995–1003.
 193. Pepine CJ, Handberg EM, Cooper-DeHoff RM, Marks RG, Kowey P, Messerli FH, Mancia 
G, Cangiano JL, Garcia-Barreto D, Keltaj M, Erdine S, Bristol HA, Kolb HR, Bakris GL, 
Cohen JD, Parmley WW, INVEST Investigators. A calcium antagonist versus a non- calcium 
antagonist hypertension treatment strategy for patients with coronary artery disease. The 
International Verapamil-Trandolapril Study (INVEST): a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 
2003;290:2805–16.
 194. Jacob S, Balletshofer B, Henriksen EJ, V olk A, Mehnert B, Loblein K, Haring HU, Rett 
K.  Beta-blocking agents in patients with insulin resistance: effects of vasodilating beta- 
blockers. Blood Press. 1999;8(5-6):261–8.
 195. Jacob S, Henriksen EJ. Metabolic properties of vasodilating beta blockers: management con-
siderations for hypertensive diabetic patients and patients with the metabolic syndrome. J 
Clin Hypertens. 2004;6(12):690–6.
 196. Fonseca V A. Effects of beta-blockers on glucose and lipid metabolism. Curr Med Res Opin. 
2010;26(3):615–29.
 197. Taylor AA, Bakris GL. The role of vasodilating beta-blockers in patients with hypertension 
and the cardiometabolic syndrome. Am J Med. 2010;123(7 Supplement 1):S21–6.
 198. Deedwania P. Hypertension, dyslipidemia, and insulin resistance in patients with diabetes 
mellitus or the cardiometabolic syndrome: benefits of vasodilating beta-blockers. J Clin 
Hypertens. 2011;13(1):52–9.
 199. Fares H, Lavie CJ, Ventura HO. Vasodilating versus first-generation beta-blockers for cardio-
vascular protection. Postgrad Med. 2012;124(2):7–15.
 200. Fergus IV , Connell KL, Ferdinand KC. A comparison of vasodilating and non-vasodilating 
beta-blockers and their effects on cardiometabolic risk. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2015;17:38.
 201. Reisin E, Owen J. Treatment: special conditions. Metabolic syndrome: obesity and the hyper -
tension connection. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2015;9(2):156–9.
 202. Jamerson K, Weber MA, Bakris GL, Dahlof B, Pitt B, Shi V , Hester A, Gupte J, Gatlin M, 
Velazquez EJ, ACCOMPLISH Trial Investigators. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(23):2417–28.
 203. Ernst ME, Carter BL, Basile JN. All thiazide-like diuretics are not chlorthalidone: putting the 
ACCOMPLISH study into perspective. J Clin Hypertens. 2009;11(1):5–10.
 204. Weber MA, Jamerson K, Bakris GL, Weir MR, Zappe D, Zhang Y , Dahlof B, Velazquez EJ, 
Pitt B. Effects of body size and hypertension treatments on cardiovascular event rates: sub-
analysis of the ACCOMPLISH randomized controlled trial. Lancet. 2013;381:537–45.
 205. National Clinical Guideline Centre. Hypertension: the clinical management of primary 
hypertension in adults: update of clinical guidelines 18 to 34. Royal College of Physicians 
(UK) 2011.
 206. The Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of 
Hypertension (ESH) and the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). 2013 ESH/ESC guide-
lines for the management of arterial hypertension. J Hypertens. 2013;31:1281–357.
 207. Dasqupta K, Quinn RR, Zarnke KB, Rabi DM, Ravani P, Daskalopoulou SS, Rabkin SW, 
Trudeau L, Feldman RD, Cloutier L, Prebtani A, Herman RJ, Bacon SL, Gilbert RE, Ruzicka 
M, McKay DW, Campbell TS, Grover S, Honos G, Schiffrin EL, Bolli P, Wilson TW, Lindsay 
P, Hill MD, Coutts SB, Gubitz G, Gelfer M, Vallee M, Prasad GV , Lebel M, McLean D, 
Arnold JM, Moe GW, Howlett JG, Boulanger JM, Larochelle P, Leiter LA, Jones C, Ogilvie 
RI, Woo V , Kaczorowski J, Burns KD, Petrella RJ, Hiremath S, Milot A, Stone JA, Drouin D, 
Lavoie KL, Lamarre-Cliché M, Tremblay G, Hamet P, Fordor G, Carruthers SG, Pylypchuk 
GB, Burgess E, Lewanczuk R, Dresser GK, Penner SB, Hegele RA, McFarlane PA, Khara 
M, Pipe A, Oh P, Selby P, Sharma M, Reid DJ, Tobe SW, Padwal RS, Poirer L, Canadian 
Hypertension Education Program. The 2014 Canadian hypertension education program rec-
ommendations for blood pressure measurement, diagnosis, assessment of risk, prevention, 
and treatment of hypertension. Can J Cardiol. 2014;30(5):485–501.15 Obesity-Hypertension Physiopathology and Treatment: A Forty-Year Retrospect231 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_16
A. H. Kirsch ( *) · A. R. Rosenkranz 
Clinical Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical  
University of Graz, Graz, Austria
e-mail: alexander.kirsch@medunigraz.at; alexander.rosenkranz@medunigraz.at16Pre-chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)? Is It 
Time for a New Staging?
Alexander H. Kirsch and Alexander R. Rosenkranz
16.1  There is Prehypertension and Prediabetes:  
Do We Need Pre-CKD?
The worldwide prevalence of chronic kidney disease (CKD) is about 12% in the 
general population [1], and the cardiovascular morbidity and mortality increases 
dramatically with reduced renal function [2]. It is well known that, at least in 
Europe, 50% of patients reaching the advanced stage 5 of CKD (CKD G5) suffer 
from diabetes and/or hypertension [3]. Such patients usually have a long history of 
disease before they progress to end-stage renal disease. Hypertension as well as 
diabetes, both have pre-stages of the disease, which are called “prehypertension” or 
“prediabetes” [4]. In particular, previous definitions of hypertension were revised 
on the basis of the recognition that values below the defining thresholds for arterial 
hypertension were associated with higher risk for adverse outcomes [5].
Prediabetes is defined as impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fasting plasma 
glucose >100 and <126  mg/dL) [4], while prehypertension is defined as arterial 
blood pressure ranging between 130 and 139 mmHg systolic or 80–89 mmHg dia-
stolic [6]. Although these terms are somehow artificial because the risk associated 
with higher blood glucose levels and blood pressure increases continuously rather 
than at a certain stage, the questions remains: is it time for a comparable stage in 
nephrology for CKD, and what could be the possible definition and/or markers [7].
The risk for stroke or coronary artery disease increases continuously starting 
with a systolic blood pressure of more than 120 mmHg [8 ]. Even mildly elevated 
“pre-hypertonic” systolic blood pressure levels higher than 120  mmHg or 
 diastolic levels of 85 mmHg in the adolescent phase are associated with higher 232
cardiovascular mortality later in life [9 ]. In addition, high-normal blood pressure 
is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease [5 ]. These findings 
emphasize the need to determine whether lowering high-normal blood pressure 
can reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease. Indeed, recent evidence points in 
the direction that untreated prehypertension leads to stage 1 hypertension, as 
shown in the TROPHY study, where the intervention could significantly reduce 
this transition [10].
Individuals with prediabetes are at high risk for the development of diabetes and, 
of course, for increased risk of cardiovascular disease [4]. Therefore, screening for 
prediabetes does make sense to flag patients for earlier intervention, which may 
slow or even prevent the progression to overt diabetes. Guidelines for diabetes 
screening already exist and have been updated recently [11]. For the general popula-
tion, screening should start at age 45, while high-risk individuals should be screened 
regardless of age. Interestingly, the American Diabetes Association recommends 
screening for albuminuria as well as measurement of serum creatinine including the 
calculation of an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) upon diagnosis of pre-
diabetes or diabetes and annually thereafter [12]. Before we introduce the term 
“pre-CKD”, we have to define the standards of screening for CKD, which are not 
absolutely clear. Also, when and how frequently to screen is unfortunately not 
strongly supported by evidence.
16.2  What Could Pre-CKD Be?
In 2009, Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcome (KDIGO) published clinical 
practice guidelines for the diagnosis, evaluation, prevention, and treatment of 
CKD-MBD (mineral and bone disorders) [13]. In this publication CKD is defined 
as an abnormality in renal structure or function which persists for more than three 
months and has implications for the affected individual’s health. One would have 
to define pre-CKD as abnormalities which are not detected by the currently 
employed classification system and screening tools employed in today’s clinical 
practice and which would predispose an individual to progression to CKD (which 
is without doubt of consequence to the subject’s health). The current staging sys-
tem considers eGFR, albuminuria, and other evidence of structural or functional 
abnormality, and in addition has nicely put the albuminuria in the center as an 
important risk factor for cardiovascular disease. In addition, a landmark study by 
Hemmelgarn and coworkers examined several adverse outcomes and demonstrated 
the independent contribution and importance of distinguishing GFR from albumin-
uria [14]. More importantly, screening for CKD, especially in the general popula-
tion, has not been accepted as a cost-effective tool as stated by the United States 
Prevention Services Task Force in 2012 [15]. A Dutch study by Van der Velde 
recently put the screening for albuminuria in the center of attention by showing 
that an urine albumin ratio >20 mg/g creatinine leads to the lowest numbers needed 
to screen to detect cardiovascular high-risk patients with decreasing eGFR [16]. 
And finally, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) suggest 
A. H. Kirsch and A. R. Rosenkranz233
screening for eGFR and albumin/creatinine ratio only in risk patients with diabe-
tes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, or a positive family history of end-stage 
renal disease [17].
Based on the abovementioned staging for CKD, there would be no space for a 
stage called pre-CKD, or is pre-CKD somehow subsumed in the term CKD G1? On 
the other hand, we also have to be aware that renal function deteriorates with age to 
a certain degree in some patients [18]. Therefore, assessing pre-CKD solely based 
on a decreased eGFR would put large numbers of elderly people in a pre-CKD state, 
and would not take into account the “normal” ageing process. Although there are 
some patients with normal eGFR (or at least higher than 60 mL/min/1.73 m2) and 
albuminuria (it is well established that albuminuria is a cardiovascular risk factor), 
this definition would not be an exact one. There is good evidence that even lower 
levels than 30 mg/g creatinine (stage A1 of the CKD staging system) are associated 
with the development of adverse outcomes such as hypertension, cardiovascular 
disease, and death. Also, the universal cutoff of >30 mg/g creatinine may not be 
appropriate as some authors have suggested that ethnicity- and more importantly 
gender-specific cutoffs and reference ranges may be more appropriate [19]. Indeed, 
in the abovementioned study from Groeningen which evaluated more than 3300 
patients, a cutoff of >20  mg/g creatinine was used as definition of albuminuria 
showing higher GFR loss and higher cardiovascular risk in this cohort [16]. On the 
other hand, eGFR levels higher than normal GFR could be a possible indicator of a 
pre-state for developing CKD. It is well known that a possible precursor of develop-
ing albuminuria is the mechanism of hyperfiltration seen in patients with diabetes as 
well as obesity (reviewed in [20]). Still, both options (low albuminuria as well as 
hyperfiltration) do not fit in the current definition of CKD. In addition, we have the 
problem of measuring or estimating renal function. Especially when looking for 
hyperfiltration, we would need urine collections or direct clearance measurements 
(inulin, iothalamate, EDTA, or iohexol) which are considered the “gold standard” 
for measuring GFR.  However, they are impractical, expensive, time-consuming, 
and invasive in the clinical setting. For this reason, eGFR-formulas have been intro-
duced that take into account endogenous filtration markers such as serum creatinine 
and demographic factors. Creatinine generation is affected by age, sex, race, muscle 
mass, and body weight independently from GFR [21]. eGFR appears to be a more 
accurate estimate of GFR than serum creatinine alone [22]. However, these equa-
tions cannot account for individual differences in muscle mass for a given age, sex, 
or race, which may be considerable. Muscle wasting is especially common in CKD 
and the elderly and it is associated with lower creatinine generation therefore, pro-
viding a bias toward falsely high eGFR.
16.3  Biomarkers for Pre-CKD
Looking for a clear definition of pre-CKD, one would expect a biomarker to be the 
best option. In recent years, a number of biomarkers have been evaluated in CKD 
(the most promising ones listed in Table  16.1[23]), but so far they have not been 16 Pre-chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)? Is It Time for a New Staging?234
evaluated as a marker for pre-CKD. Monitoring those markers which could provide 
rapid, noninvasive, and specific detection of renal tissue pathologies could be used 
as a marker for pre-CKD. This could be similar to “supranormal” blood pressure or 
slightly elevated blood sugar levels as markers of prehypertension or prediabetes. 
Early identification of patients with pre-CKD would be important in order to per -
form early interventions and reduce progression to kidney failure or cardiovascular 
events.
In recent years, several researchers have promoted the use of cystatin C (CyC) 
for measuring renal function more accurately. CyC is a 13 kDa protein synthesized 
at a constant rate in all nucleated cells, and is freely filtered in the glomerulus and 
reabsorbed and catabolized completely in the proximal tubule with a lack of tubular 
secretion [24]. CyC is less affected by muscle mass than serum creatinine, and is 
considered to be a better marker of early kidney dysfunction and a more reliable 
marker of renal function [25]. Investigators from CKD-EPI developed a set of three 
eGFR equations for CyC and compared these equations to measured GFR: using 
CyC alone, CyC with demographic factors, and CyC with creatinine and demo-
graphic factors. The equation that included CyC, creatinine, and demographic coef-
ficients provided the most accurate eGFR [26]. Still, the problem remains that 
pre-CKD would not fit into a categorization based on the eGFR levels. Therefore,  
GFR-independent biomarkers, which still show renal damage or starting distur -
bances of renal function would be preferable.Table 16.1 Based on a review by Wasung et al. [20]
Legend Source Physiological action
Plasma asymmetric 
dimethylarginineADMA Endothelial cells Impaired clearance or increased 
production
Fibroblast growth 
factor 23FGF23 osteocytes
Monocyte 
chemoattractant  
protein -1MCP-1 All nucleated cells, 
renal cells
Neutrophil gelatinase-
associated lipocalinNGAL Leukocytes, loop of 
Henle and collecting 
ductsReleased from lysosomes, 
brush-border and cytoplasm of 
proximal tubular epithelial  cells
Urinary cystatin-C Cystatin C All nucleated cells
Liver-type fatty 
acid-binding proteinL-FABP Hepatocytes, kidney: 
proximal tubular cells
Connective tissue 
growth factorCTGF All tissues Excessive production of 
profibrotic growth factors and 
extracellular matrix
Transforming growth 
factor—β1TGF-β1 All tissues
Collagen IV COLIV Kidney, eye, skin
Plasma cystatin C Cystatin C All nucleated cells Impaired GFR
Podocalyxin PCX Podocytes Podocyte structure defect
Nephrin Nep Podocytes Integral component of the 
podocyte slit diaphragm; released 
by podocytes when damaged
A. H. Kirsch and A. R. Rosenkranz235
The role of neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) has been evalu-
ated especially in the field of acute kidney injury. Unfortunately, despite high 
expectations in the beginning, NGAL has failed to fulfil most and recent evidence 
showed that NGAL is not a good biomarker to predict AKI [27]. NGAL is 
expressed by tubular epithelial cells in response to injury and tubulointerstitial 
damage that is a common pathway in progression of most forms of kidney disease 
[28]. NGAL has performed well as a biomarker in CKD (mostly concerning renal 
function) in small cohorts. In children, NGAL levels were inversely associated 
with the GFR; and as renal function was lower than 30 mL/min/1.73 m2, NGAL 
outperformed CyC as a biomarker for kidney function [29]. In adults urinary 
NGAL to creatinine ratio (uNCR) was associated with a higher risk for death and 
initiation of dialysis independent from renal and cardiovascular risk factors [30]. 
The authors concluded that measuring uNCR improves the prediction of renal 
disease progression in this population. In addition, plasma NGAL levels also pre-
dicted the progression of CKD in adults, even after adjustment for eGFR [31]. 
However, in this study the small sample size has to be taken into consideration. 
Still, a possible role in predicting early renal changes or CKD progression has not 
been sufficiently evaluated in those studies leaving us without a possible hint for 
defining a pre-CKD-stage.
To date, nephrologists are focusing on mineral and bone disorders associated 
with reduced renal function as extensively evaluated in the new KDIGO 2017 
Clinical Practice Guideline Update for the Diagnosis, Evaluation, Prevention, and 
Treatment of CKD-MBD [32]. As renal function declines due to a decrease in the 
number of functioning nephrons, single nephron phosphate excretion has to increase 
to maintain serum phosphate levels within normal ranges. Ultimately, this compen-
satory mechanism falls short and serum phosphate levels begin to rise. Also, renal 
calcitriol production declines and as a result calcium tends to decrease. Fibroblast 
growth factor 23 (FGF23) is a 32-kDa protein secreted primarily by osteocytes that 
plays an important role in controlling serum phosphate concentration. It acts as an 
endocrine hormone by inhibiting parathyroid hormone secretion, decreasing levels 
of calcitriol, and by inducing phosphaturia [33]. Circulating levels of FGF23 
increase progressively as renal function declines below 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 [34]. A 
considerable amount of evidence has shown that an elevated level of FGF23 is an 
independent risk factor for adverse outcomes in CKD such as faster progression, 
higher incidence of cardiovascular disease, and increased mortality [35, 36].
Here we have to consider the possible interaction of phosphate levels as well as 
increased FGF23 in patients with normal renal function. Many studies show a sig-
nificant association between elevated serum phosphorus levels, poor clinical out-
come and vascular calcification. The Framingham Offspring study showed a steadily 
increasing association between phosphate levels and incidence of cardiovascular 
disease [37]. First of all, this study showed that even within normal serum phos-
phate ranges, there is an increasing risk for cardiovascular disease [37]. Secondly, 
this has been observed in adults with normal renal function [37]! This has been sup-
ported by the Atherosclerosis Risk in Community (ARIC) study including more 
than 15,000 persons, where the authors could show an association between serum 16 Pre-chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)? Is It Time for a New Staging?236
phosphate levels and stroke as well as serum phosphate levels and death [38]. 
Although the presented studies imply that phosphate even in normal range is a ther -
apeutic target, it is not clear how to manage phosphate metabolism in real life. And, 
most of all, it will be difficult to interpret the effect of phosphate lowering within the 
normal range of the lab value. Therefore, it would be of utmost importance to have 
a biomarker with a better “discrimination.” Could FGF23 be such a useful 
biomarker?
The landmark study of Gutierrez et al. in 2008 showed for the first time in dialy-
sis patients that FGF23 is a much better predictor of mortality at the initiation of 
dialysis than phosphorus [39]. For years, we nephrologists have followed the path 
set out by Block et al., who showed an association between phosphate levels and 
mortality—the higher the phosphate levels the higher the mortality [40]. The rela-
tive increase in risk was only 30%, still statistically significant, but compared to the 
newer data of FGF23  in the Gutierrez study nearly negligible. In addition, even 
lower serum phosphate levels (within the normal range and below), showed an asso-
ciation with mortality [40]. Going into the data of the Gutierrez study, we see an 
association between serum phosphorus levels and mortality as well, but this pales in 
comparison to the association between FGF23 and the mortality. The authors con-
cluded that FGF23 is a much better predictor for mortality, at least in the dialysis 
population at that time [39]. Those data have been supported by a post hoc analysis 
of the EVOLVE study. The EVOLVE study was planned to show a reduction of 
mortality in dialysis patients receiving the calcimimetic cinacalcet compared to 
standard care (in most cases active vitamin D), and the study failed to show its pri-
mary objective [41]. This came surprising, since earlier the ADV ANCE study had 
shown that dialysis patients on cinacalcet had a significant reduction in cardiovas-
cular calcification [42]. And it is well known by the work of Gerard London that 
vascular calcification is the driving force behind mortality in the dialysis population 
[43]. A post hoc analysis of the EVOLVE study by Sharon Moe nicely revealed an 
important role of FGF23 as a marker of treatment success. Those patients who had 
a reduction in FGF23 by cinacalcet also showed a significant decrease of mortality 
[44]. So, one could conclude that FGF23 is on the one hand a good marker for car -
diovascular risk, and on the other hand a good marker to follow the treatment suc-
cess. Still, one has to admit that the studies described here have been undertaken in 
the dialysis population with terminal end-stage renal disease.
Even a study on the association between FGF23 levels and progression of kid-
ney disease, meaning loss of kidney function, showing that levels of FGF23 higher 
than 35 pg/mL were associated with a higher rate of decline in renal function, has 
been performed in advanced stages of kidney disease [45]. Still, we are not sure 
what to think about the use of this biomarker in patients (or more accurate “indi-
viduals”) with normal renal function. Eventually, FGF23 could be a link to higher 
cardiovascular mortality without reduction in renal function on the one hand, and 
on the other FGF23 could be an early marker of renal dysfunction and then set the 
stage for “Pre-CKD”.
Once again the group of Gutierrez has set the stage for such speculations: The 
group showed an association between FGF23 levels and cardiac hypertrophy in 
A. H. Kirsch and A. R. Rosenkranz237
patients with reduced renal function, a finding which was surprising at that time 
[46]. Recently, this was clarified by the findings of Grabner et al. [47]. They revealed 
that the fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 (FGFR4) on myocardial cells mediates 
the pro-hypertrophic cardiac effects of FGF23 (mostly elevated in patients with 
CKD, but probably also in early renal dysfunction). Activation of FGFR4/calcineu-
rin/NFAT signaling is sufficient to induce cardiac hypertrophy in mice, while 
FGFR4 blockade attenuates cardiac hypertrophy in a rat model of CKD [47]. Still, 
these are only data in CKD patients. But several recent studies extend the findings 
in those patients to individuals with a renal function that would not be diagnosed as 
CKD in today’s clinical practice. A community-based study in elderly persons 
(Prospective Investigation of the Vasculature in Uppsala Seniors (PIVUS) study) 
with normal renal function (mean eGFR approximately 80 mL/min/1.73 m2) showed 
an association between serum FGF23 and total body atherosclerosis [48]. This 
comes hand in hand with findings from a cohort of patients with mild renal disease, 
showing that patients with stage CKD G1 (eGFR >90 mL/min/1.73 m2) have ele-
vated levels of FGF23 [49]. This allows for speculation that these could be patients 
with early renal injury. FGF23, therefore, could not only be a marker for individuals 
with renal dysfunction, but also for those with elevated risk for cardiovascular com-
plications. This has been nicely shown in a recent study of patients with eGFR 
between 70 and 80 mL/min/1.73 m2 [50]: the incidence of mortality as well as car -
diovascular events correlated with higher levels of FGF23 [50].
 Conclusion
Taken together, the field has been opened and prepared to further evaluate the 
role of FGF23 as a biomarker of pre-CKD. Current evidence supports further 
evaluation in larger cohorts or community-based studies to be initiated. We could 
have a strong tool in our hands not only to identify persons at risk for cardiovas-
cular events as well as renal dysfunction, but also to more accurately direct thera-
peutic interventions. Our increasing understanding of the role of FGF23, not 
only as a phosphatonin, but also as a mediator of cardiovascular risk should 
stimulate further research on the role of FGF23 as well as the potential therapeu-
tic implications of this hormone.
References
 1. Coresh J, et  al. Prevalence of chronic kidney disease in the United States. JAMA. 
2007;298:2038–47.
 2. Go AS, Chertow GM, Fan D, McCulloch CE, Hsu C-Y . Chronic kidney disease and the risks 
of death, cardiovascular events, and hospitalization. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1296–305.
 3. Prischl FC, et al. Diabetes-related end-stage renal disease in Austria 1965–2013. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant. 2015;30:1920–7.
 4. Nathan DM, et al. Impaired fasting glucose and impaired glucose tolerance: implications for 
care. Diabetes Care. 2007;30:753–9.
 5. Vasan RS, et al. Impact of high-normal blood pressure on the risk of cardiovascular disease.  
N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1291–7.16 Pre-chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)? Is It Time for a New Staging?238
 6. Chobanian A V , et  al. The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, 
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 
2003;289:2560–72.
 7. Curhan GC. Prediabetes, prehypertension … is it time for pre-CKD? Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2010;5:557–9.
 8. Lewington S, et al. Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular mortality: a 
meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 
2002;360:1903–13.
 9. Sundstrom J, Neovius M, Tynelius P, Rasmussen F.  Association of blood pressure in late 
adolescence with subsequent mortality: cohort study of Swedish male conscripts. BMJ. 
2011;342:d643.
 10. Julius S, et al. Feasibility of treating prehypertension with an angiotensin-receptor blocker. N 
Engl J Med. 2006;354:1685–97.
 11. Chamberlain JJ, et  al. Pharmacologic therapy for type 2 diabetes: synopsis of the 2017 
American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Ann Intern Med. 
2017;166:572–8.
 12. American Diabetes Association. Classification and diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes 
Care. 2017;40:S11–24.
 13. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD-MBD Work Group. KDIGO 
clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis, evaluation, prevention, and treatment of 
Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD). Kidney Int Suppl. 
2009;76:S1–130.
 14. Hemmelgarn BR, et al. Relation between kidney function, proteinuria, and adverse outcomes. 
JAMA. 2010;303:423–9.
 15. Moyer V A, U.S.  Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for chronic kidney dis-
ease: U.S.  Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 
2012;157:567–70.
 16. van der Velde M, de Jong PE, Gansevoort RT. Comparison of the yield of different screening 
approaches to detect chronic kidney disease. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010;25:3222–30.
 17. Carville S, Wonderling D, Stevens P, Guideline Development G.  Early identification and 
management of chronic kidney disease in adults: summary of updated NICE guidance. BMJ. 
2014;349:g4507.
 18. Wetzels JF, Kiemeney LA, Swinkels DW, Willems HL, den Heijer M. Age- and gender-specific 
reference values of estimated GFR in Caucasians: the Nijmegen Biomedical Study. Kidney Int. 
2007;72:632–7.
 19. Mattix HJ, Hsu C-Y , Shaykevich S, Curhan G. Use of the albumin/creatinine ratio to detect 
microalbuminuria: implications of sex and race. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2002;13:1034–9.
 20. Tonneijck L, et al. Glomerular hyperfiltration in diabetes: mechanisms, clinical significance, 
and treatment. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28:1023–39.
 21. Stevens LA, Coresh J, Greene T, Levey AS. Assessing kidney function—measured and esti-
mated glomerular filtration rate. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:2473–83.
 22. Levey AS, Stevens LA. Estimating GFR using the CKD Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-
EPI) creatinine equation: more accurate GFR estimates, lower CKD prevalence estimates, and 
better risk predictions. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010;55:622–7.
 23. Wasung ME, Chawla LS, Madero M. Biomarkers of renal function, which and when? Clinica 
chimica acta. Int J Clin Chem. 2015;438:350–7.
 24. Abrahamson M, Dalboge H, Olafsson I, Carlsen S, Grubb A. Efficient production of native, 
biologically active human cystatin C by Escherichia coli. FEBS Lett. 1988;236:14–8.
 25. Hojs R, Bevc S, Ekart R, Gorenjak M, Puklavec L. Serum cystatin C as an endogenous marker 
of renal function in patients with mild to moderate impairment of kidney function. Nephrol 
Dial Transplant. 2006;21:1855–62.
 26. Stevens LA, et  al. Estimating GFR using serum cystatin C alone and in combination with 
serum creatinine: a pooled analysis of 3,418 individuals with CKD.  Am J Kidney Dis. 
2008;51:395–406.
A. H. Kirsch and A. R. Rosenkranz239
 27. Ribitsch W, et al. Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) fails as an early  predictor 
of contrast induced nephropathy in chronic kidney disease (ANTI-CI-AKI study). Sci Rep. 
2017;7:41300.
 28. Kuncio GS, Neilson EG, Haverty T.  Mechanisms of tubulointerstitial fibrosis. Kidney Int. 
1991;39:550–6.
 29. Mitsnefes MM, et al. Serum neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin as a marker of renal 
function in children with chronic kidney disease. Pediatr Nephrol. 2007;22:101–8.
 30. Smith ER, et al. Urinary neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin may aid prediction of renal 
decline in patients with non-proteinuric stages 3 and 4 chronic kidney disease (CKD). Nephrol 
Dial Transplant. 2013;28:1569–79.
 31. Bolignano D, et  al. Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) and progression of 
chronic kidney disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009;4:337–44.
 32. Ketteler M, et al. Executive summary of the 2017 KDIGO Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral 
and Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD) Guideline update: what's changed and why it matters. Kidney 
Int. 2017;92:26–36.
 33. Isakova T, Wolf MS. FGF23 or PTH: which comes first in CKD ? Kidney Int. 2010;78:  
947–9.
 34. Gutierrez O, et al. Fibroblast growth factor-23 mitigates hyperphosphatemia but accentuates 
calcitriol deficiency in chronic kidney disease. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005;16:2205–15.
 35. Isakova T, et al. Fibroblast growth factor 23 is elevated before parathyroid hormone and phos-
phate in chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int. 2011;79:1370–8.
 36. Isakova T, et al. Fibroblast growth factor 23 and risks of mortality and end-stage renal disease 
in patients with chronic kidney disease. JAMA. 2011;305:2432–9.
 37. Dhingra R, et al. Relations of serum phosphorus and calcium levels to the incidence of cardio-
vascular disease in the community. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167:879–85.
 38. Foley RN, Collins AJ, Ishani A, Kalra PA. Calcium-phosphate levels and cardiovascular dis-
ease in community-dwelling adults: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study. 
Am Heart J. 2008;156:556–63.
 39. Gutiérrez OM, et al. Fibroblast growth factor 23 and mortality among patients undergoing 
hemodialysis. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:584–92.
 40. Block GA, Hulbert-Shearon TE, Levin NW, Port FK. Association of serum phosphorus and 
calcium × phosphate product with mortality risk in chronic hemodialysis patients: a national 
study. Am J Kidney Dis. 1998;31:607–17.
 41. The EVOLVE Trial Investigators. Effect of cinacalcet on cardiovascular disease in 
patients undergoing dialysis. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2482–94. https://doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMoa1205624.
 42. Raggi P, et al. The ADV ANCE study: a randomized study to evaluate the effects of cinacalcet 
plus low-dose vitamin D on vascular calcification in patients on hemodialysis. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant. 2011;26:1327–39.
 43. Blacher J, Guerin AP, Pannier B, Marchais SJ, London GM.  Arterial calcifications, 
arterial stiffness, and cardiovascular risk in end-stage renal disease. Hypertension. 
2001;38:938–42.
 44. Moe SM, et al. Cinacalcet, fibroblast growth factor-23, and cardiovascular disease in hemodi-
alysis: the Evaluation of Cinacalcet HCl Therapy to Lower Cardiovascular Events (EVOLVE) 
trial. Circulation. 2015;132:27–39.
 45. Fliser D, et  al. Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) predicts progression of chronic kid-
ney disease: the Mild to Moderate Kidney Disease (MMKD) study. J Am Soc Nephrol. 
2007;18:2600–8.
 46. Gutiérrez OM, et al. Fibroblast growth factor 23 and left ventricular hypertrophy in chronic 
kidney disease. Circulation. 2009;119:2545–52.
 47. Grabner A, et al. Activation of cardiac fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 causes left ventricu-
lar hypertrophy. Cell Metab. 2015;22:1020–32.
 48. Mirza MA, et al. Relationship between circulating FGF23 and total body atherosclerosis in the 
community. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2009;24:3125–31.16 Pre-chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)? Is It Time for a New Staging?240
 49. Evenepoel P, et  al. Fibroblast growth factor-23  in early chronic kidney disease: additional 
support in favor of a phosphate-centric paradigm for the pathogenesis of secondary hyperpara-
thyroidism. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;5:1268–76.
 50. Parker BD, et al. The associations of fibroblast growth factor 23 and uncarboxylated matrix 
Gla protein with mortality in coronary artery disease: the Heart and Soul Study. Ann Intern 
Med. 2010;152:640–8.
A. H. Kirsch and A. R. Rosenkranz241 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_17
C. Dreyfuss-Tubiana · M. E. Safar · J. Blacher ( *) 
AP-HP, Diagnosis and Therapeutic Center, Paris-Descartes University, Hôtel Dieu University 
Hospital, Paris, France
e-mail: jacques.blacher@aphp.fr17Prehypertension and Vascular-Renal 
Impairment
Celine Dreyfuss-Tubiana, Michel E. Safar, 
and Jacques Blacher
17.1  Introduction
The concept of prehypertension has been developed in late 1930s following a series 
of studies showing a progressive increase of premature death from cardiovascular 
disease (CVD) in persons with blood pressure (BP) between 120 and 140 mmHg [1 ].
More than 60 years later, in 2003, prehypertension, been defined as 120–139 mmHg 
for systolic blood pressure (SBP) and/or 80–89 mmHg for diastolic blood pressure 
(DBP), entered the American hypertension guidelines, because of longitudinal data 
obtained from Framingham Heart Study, that indicated that this range of values was 
associated with a more than twofold increase in relative risk for CVD compared with 
those with BP levels below 120/80 mmHg [2 ]. This designation was intended to iden-
tify those individuals in whom early intervention by adoption of healthy lifestyle 
could reduce BP, decrease the rate of progression of BP to hypertensive levels with 
age and finally prevent hypertension [3 ].
In this context, it remained essential to understand and study prehypertension. 
Over 60% of incident CVD events occurred in participants with SBP/DBP 
<140/90 mmHg. This represented a fundamental shift from previous decades when 
the majority of incident CVD events occurred among US adults with SBP/DBP 
>140/90 mmHg [4]. The finding that the majority of incident CVD events in the 
modern era occurred in participants with SBP/DBP <140/90 mmHg represented a 
change from studies conducted in prior eras. These data highlighted the need for 
primordial prevention of hypertension, earlier detection and treatment of hyperten-
sion, and additional CVD risk reduction strategies for adults with hypertension once 
BP control has been achieved [3, 4].242
Since then, many authors studied the physiopathology of prehypertension, 
 investigated its etiology, and designed protocols to highlight the need of treatments 
for prehypertensive patients. In this chapter, we will focus on vascular and/or renal 
impairment in prehypertension: its physiopathology, its role in prehypertension, the 
method of its diagnosis, treatment, and the importance of prevention.
17.2  Physiopathology-Role of Salt
It has been shown that hereditary and environmental factors were related to the 
development of hypertension. Among all environmental factors, salt intake has 
attracted great attention. The character of reversibility has also been discussed. In 
the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial of type 1 diabetes mellitus, the group 
that originally received intensive therapy had lower incidence of cardiovascular dis-
ease compared with conventional control, although the hemoglobin A1c levels in 
the two groups had converged. The authors proposed the concept of metabolic 
memory to illustrate this phenomenon [5]. Some authors have suggested that tran-
sient high-salt diet on weanling Dahl salt-sensitive rats (DS rats) for 6 weeks was 
capable of inducing permanent hypertension [6]. Therefore, the effects of tempo-
rary exposure to a high-salt diet on the development of hypertension and whether or 
not salt memory exists was examined in a complete study [7]. In this article, Oguchi 
and colleagues experimented law-salt, normal-salt, high-sodium/normal-chloride 
diet in DS rats on blood pressure and urine protein excretion. Moreover, they trans-
planted kidneys from DS rats to spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) fed with 
high-sodium diet and conversely for the kidneys and the diet. In this study, they 
showed that transient high-salt intake during early phases in the development of 
hypertension induced sustained elevation of BP in hypertensive model rats. This 
phenomenon was named salt memory. Jax [5] proposed that microvascular changes 
mediated by hyperglycemia could play an important role in the development of 
metabolic memory observed in the Diabetes Control and Complications Trials in 
diabetes mellitus, so that the change in renal microvasculature through increase in 
BP at a certain important period could play a major role, resulting in the occurrence 
of the salt memory. No major differences were found in other arterioles of similar 
size than the renal arterioles, which underscored the importance of the kidney arte-
rioles in the vascular response to high-salt treatments. One potential mechanism by 
which a high-salt diet in the presence of high Angiotensin II levels caused renal 
vascular injury could involve an increase in oxidative stress [8]. It was reported that 
intrarenal angiotensinogen was enhanced in DS rats on high-salt diet [9] and that an 
augmented intrarenal renin–angiotensin system (RAS) during high-salt diet might 
contribute to the development of renal injury in SHR [10]. Another report demon-
strated that renal angiotensin II played an important role in causing renal cortical 
damage and decreased in renal hemodynamics independent of BP elevation [11]. It 
meant that renal RAS activation induced by a high-salt diet could cause renal vas-
cular injury independently of BP elevation. Finally, Oguchi also tested whether the 
location of salt memory was in the kidneys by performing cross transplantation. It 
allowed to establish that salt memory was mainly localized in the kidney [7].
C. Dreyfuss-Tubiana et al.243
17.3  Diagnosis and Interactions
To track prehypertension, measuring blood pressure could be enough. But, it’s still 
not recommended to treat. Nevertheless, some authors proposed to specify other 
comorbidities when prehypertension is discovered. Indeed, in prehypertension, SBP 
was associated with microalbuminuria. In the evaluation of increased blood pres-
sures, microalbuminuria should be investigated even in prehypertensive stages. 
According to some authors, subjects with increased blood pressures should get 
medical treatment to prevent the effects on vascular structure even in prehyperten-
sive stage [12]. Wang et al. studied the association of glycemic status with MA in 
prehypertensive and ideal BP subjects and to evaluate the interaction between gly-
cemic and blood pressure status as risk factors for MA prevalence [13]. More than 
1000 subjects aged 40–70 without hypertension who were recruited from six dis-
tricts of Tianjin were divided into prehypertensive group (622 cases) and optimal 
BP (437 cases). Subjects of prehypertensive group and optimal BP group were 
divided respectively into three subgroups: normoglycemia subgroup, prediabetes 
subgroup, and diabetes subgroup. The prevalence of MA in the above three sub-
groups of subjects with prehypertension and optimal BP were assessed. The differ -
ences in prehypertensive group were statistically significant. There was no 
interaction between prediabetes and BP status regarding microalbuminuria. In pre-
hypertensive group, multivariate logistic regression models showed that the diabe-
tes subgroup had a significant association with microalbuminuria. However, there 
was no significant association of glycemic status with MA in optimal BP group. 
Those findings suggested that there was a statistically significant association 
between diabetes and microalbuminuria only in prehypertensive subjects. In addi-
tion, this study highlighted the interaction between prehypertension and diabetes as 
a risk factor for MA.
Other parameters could help to evaluate the level of cardiovascular risk in prehy-
pertensive patients. Jia and colleagues highlighted that coronary computed tomog-
raphy could provide multiple aortic elasticity related indices for prehypertensive 
patients, without additional contrast media consumption and radiation dose. It was 
hypothesized that the early detection of ascending aortic elasticity index changes, 
especially for aortic distensibility, were essential for identifying the high-risk indi-
viduals in the prehypertensive populations [14].
17.4  Pathophysiologic Changes Associated 
with Prehypertension
Many studies confirm the considerable vascular and renal risks in the prehyperten-
sive blood pressure range, namely a significant increase in the risks of cardiovascu-
lar mortality and all-cause mortality [15]. It is clear that prehypertension is 
characterized by greater thrombotic tendency, namely increased plasma levels of 
fibrinogen, thrombomodulin, and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 antigen [16]. 
Chronic elevations in blood pressure in the prehypertensive range are atherogenic, 
contributing to widespread vascular and structural damage to all organs and tissues, 17 Prehypertension and Vascular-Renal Impairment244
particularly the heart, brain, and kidneys. Increased carotid intima-media thickness, 
coronary artery calcification, abnormal left ventricular morphology and diastolic 
dysfunction, reduced large-artery elasticity, aortic stiffening and vascular endothe-
lial dysfunction are some of the major abnormalities that commence and progress in 
the prehypertensive stage [17].
At the renal level, several studies and large meta-analysis have demonstrated that 
prehypertension is associated with a statistically significant increased risk of chronic 
kidney disease, namely end-stage renal disease, after controlling for several cardio-
vascular risk factors. The association is independent of age, sex, and other risk fac-
tors, such as diabetes, body mass index, and smoking [18–20].
17.5  Interventional Studies
17.5.1  Animal Models
Some studies have shown in animals that the transient treatment of stroke-prone 
spontaneously hypertensive rats or Dahl salt-sensitive rats (DS rats) during an early 
phase in the development of hypertension with angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) 
resulted in attenuation of hypertension [21, 22] and found that development of renal 
arteriolar injury was also suppressed in these models. It was also shown that transient 
administration of angiotensin II (Ang II) caused renal vascular injury and renin–
angiotensin system (RAS) activation, resulting in sustained hypertension after cessa-
tion of Ang II treatment in spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) [21, 22].
17.5.2  Human Studies
Abnormalities in cardiovascular structure and function and in neuroendocrine con-
trol occurred in young adults with a predisposition to hypertension. In rats with 
spontaneous hypertension, brief treatment of young animals with a renin–angioten-
sin antagonist has lifelong effects in reducing blood pressure. Therefore, one can 
hypothesize that an intervention in humans with prehypertension might alter the 
natural history and prevent or delay the onset of established hypertension [3].
Non-pharmacological interventions have been experimented in prehypertensive 
patients with favorable results, in term of delaying a future diagnosis of hyperten-
sion. Then, since the JNC VI, in 1997 [23], current guidelines recommend that pre-
hypertension be managed with changes in the participant’s lifestyle, weight loss, 
salt restriction, exercise, and dietary modifications [24–28]. Despite intensive com-
munity efforts to promote healthful lifestyles, however, the prevalence of prehyper -
tension continues to increase, stressing the opportunity of a pharmacological 
treatment in patients with prehypertension. Indeed, several points are in favor of an 
earlier pharmacological treatment in prehypertension : (i) blood pressure remains a 
strong predictor of cardiovascular events after adjustment for other risk factors, sug-
gesting that lowering blood pressure might be beneficial ; (ii) hypertension is a self-
accelerating condition. The transition from prehypertension to established 
C. Dreyfuss-Tubiana et al.245
hypertension reflects, in part, ongoing changes such as arteriolar hypertrophy [29] 
and endothelial dysfunction [30]. Third, increased vasoconstriction and diminished 
vasodilatation, consistent with these structural and functional findings, have been 
described in prehypertension [31].
The first trial came from the TROPHY study [32]. The Trial of Preventing 
Hypertension (TROPHY) was an investigator-initiated study to examine whether 
early treatment of prehypertension, defined for this study as systolic pressure of 
130–139 mmHg and diastolic pressure of 89 mmHg or lower and systolic pressure 
of 139 mmHg or lower and diastolic pressure of 85–89 mmHg, might prevent or 
delay the development of subsequent incident hypertension. The TROPHY study 
seeks only the proof of principle that early pharmacological treatment of prehyper -
tension might delay or prevent development of clinical (stage 1) hypertension [32]. 
The TROPHY study assessed the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of two years of 
treatment in participants with prehypertension. This four-year, multicenter, random-
ized study involved untreated participants 30–65 years of age with blood pressure 
on study entry in the high-normal range. Participants were eligible for the trial if 
they were not being treated for hypertension, if at the first clinic visit the blood pres-
sure was lower than 160/100 mmHg, and if the average of the three blood pressure 
readings at the three visits was a systolic pressure of 130–139 mmHg and a diastolic 
pressure of 89 mmHg or lower or a systolic pressure of 139 mmHg or lower and a 
diastolic pressure of 85–89 mmHg. The study consisted of a two-year, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled phase that was followed by a two-year phase in which all study 
patients received placebo. The main study end point was the development of clinical 
hypertension. Eight hundred and nine participants (409 assigned to candesartan and 
400 assigned to placebo) were eligible for enrollment. Data on 772 participants 
(391  in the candesartan group and 381  in the placebo group) were available for 
further analysis. New onset of hypertension was significantly reduced in the cande-
sartan group at 2 years (P < 0.001) and 4 years (P < 0.001). The absolute reduction 
in the incidence of new-onset hypertension at 2 years with candesartan was 26.8%, 
as compared with 8% with the most successful lifestyle intervention in the Trials of 
Hypertension Prevention [33]. Indeed, authors were clear about untreated prehyper -
tension. It was a self-accelerating condition. Evolving arteriolar hypertrophy and 
endothelial dysfunction facilitated the later increase of blood pressure and contrib-
uted to the transition from prehypertension to established hypertension. Treatment 
of prehypertension with candesartan monotherapy decreased incident hypertension 
in participants in this study. This therapy decreased the development of hyperten-
sion and the proportion of patients who became hypertensive.
Another trial, the PHARAO study, demonstrated that ramipril, an ACE inhibitor, 
given to prehypertensives, reduced the risk of hypertension by 34%, compared to 
those not taking an antihypertensive drug. However, there was no difference in CV 
events (stroke or myocardial infarction) [34].
Moreover, the role of therapy in persons at intermediate risk (defined as an 
annual risk of major cardiovascular events of approximately 1%) who do not have 
vascular disease and who have a systolic blood pressure of less than 160 mmHg 
(who represent the majority of middle-aged and older persons) remains less clear. 
This was evaluated in the Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE)-3 trial 17 Prehypertension and Vascular-Renal Impairment246
[35]. The trial evaluated blood-pressure-lowering therapy with a fixed-dose combi-
nation of an angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) and a thiazide diuretic, cholesterol-
lowering therapy with a statin, and the combination of both interventions in persons 
at intermediate cardiovascular risk. The trial included men 55 years of age or older 
and women 65 years of age or older who had at least one of the following cardiovas-
cular risk factors: elevated waist-to-hip ratio, history of low concentration of high-
density lipoprotein cholesterol, current or recent tobacco use, dysglycemia, family 
history of premature coronary disease, and mild renal dysfunction and women 
60 years of age or older who had at least two such risk factors. Participants were 
randomly assigned to the daily administration of either a fixed-dose combination of 
candesartan at a dose of 16 mg and hydrochlorothiazide at a dose of 12.5 mg or 
placebo; participants were also randomly assigned to receive either rosuvastatin at a 
dose of 10 mg or placebo. The prespecified primary efficacy outcome was the com-
posite of death from cardiovascular causes, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or non-
fatal stroke. From April 2007 through November 2010, 12,705 participants (86.5%) 
underwent randomization; 6356 participants were randomly assigned to candesar -
tan plus hydrochlorothiazide, and 6349 to placebo. At baseline, the mean blood 
pressure decreases from baseline during the trial were 10.0 ± 13.1 mmHg in the 
active-treatment group and 4.0 ± 12.9 mmHg in the placebo group, and the average 
difference between the groups was 6.0 ± 13.0 mmHg. Concerning diastolic BP, the 
mean decreases from baseline during the trial were 5.7 ± 8.2 mmHg in the active-
treatment group and 2.7 ± 7.9mmHg in the placebo group and the average differ -
ence between the groups was 3.0 ± 8.0 mmHg. There were no significant differences 
between the active-treatment group and the placebo group in the incidence of the 
primary outcome. Then, they divided the participants who received the treatment in 
three groups, according to the baseline BP value. Only participants in the subgroup 
for the upper third of systolic blood pressure (>143.5  mmHg; mean, 
154.1 ± 8.9 mmHg) who were in the active-treatment group had nominally signifi-
cantly lower rates than those in the placebo group with respect to the primary out-
come (hazard ratio, 0.73; 95% CI: 0.56–0.94) showing that this trial did not show 
any cardiovascular benefit of treating normotensive and prehypertensive subjects 
with a combination of two antihypertensive drugs. Only patients with hypertension 
at inclusion decreased their cardiovascular risk.
Finally, it seems reasonable to conclude that data coming from therapeutic trials 
are not convincing enough to largely propose a pharmacological treatment in 
patients with prehypertension.
17.6  Prehypertension at the Population Level
The problem of prehypertension, such as the problem of hypertension, is quite het-
erogeneous in different countries according to their economic status. In this respect, 
it is interesting to analyze the results of the PURE study. The overall Prospective 
Urban Rural Epidemiology (PURE) study was a prospective, standardized collab-
orative study in which they reported a cross-sectional analysis of baseline data to 
C. Dreyfuss-Tubiana et al.247
assess the prevalence, awareness, treatment, and control of hypertension by the eco-
nomic status of countries and by sex, age group, location (urban vs. rural), and 
education of the participants. In the PURE study, the overall aim was to examine the 
relationship of societal influences on lifestyle behaviors, cardiovascular risk factors, 
and incidence and mortality of chronic diseases [36].The PURE study enumerated 
382,341 individuals from 107,599 households in 628 communities (348 urban and 
280 rural) in 17 countries on 5 continents from January 2003 to December 2009. 
This study found a large gap between both detection and control of hypertension 
across all countries studied. It showed that while initial therapy was started in the 
large majority of individuals who were detected to have hypertension, control in 
participants receiving treatment was very poor. Awareness, treatment, and control 
were lower in participants with primary or no education, most likely reflecting a 
combination of low socioeconomic status, which might influence access to care, 
lack of knowledge of the sequelae of uncontrolled hypertension, and differing val-
ues with respect to the importance of the future. This important fact, recorded in a 
very large panel of population could urge us to develop strategies and treatment 
before having sustained hypertension. So, we understood the role of salt intake, and 
salt memory so that we indicated the importance of avoiding excess salt intake and 
undergoing an appropriate antihypertensive treatment intervention at the early stage 
of the development of hypertension [4–6].
 Conclusion
Prehypertension, a frequent condition at the population level, is undoubtedly ath-
erogenic, contributing to widespread vascular and structural damage to all organs 
and tissues, particularly the blood vessels, heart, brain and kidneys. Increased 
carotid intima-media thickness, coronary artery calcification, abnormal left ven-
tricular morphology and diastolic dysfunction, reduced large-artery elasticity, 
aortic stiffening and vascular endothelial dysfunction are some of the major 
abnormalities that commence and progress in the prehypertensive stage. 
Prehypertensive patients have a significant increase in the risks of cardiovascular 
mortality and all-cause mortality.
In thsis respect, prehypertension is a major health challenge that requires more 
attention. The first-line treatment for prehypertensives should be based on adap-
tion of a healthy lifestyle, especially if there are other associated CV or renal risk 
factors, with special emphasis on salt restriction. More research is needed to clar -
ify the place of pharmacological treatments in patients with prehypertension.
References
 1. Robinson SC, Brucer M. Range of normal blood pressure: a statistical and clinical study of 
11,383 persons. Arch Intern Med. 1939;64:409–44.
 2. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, Jones DW, 
Materson BJ, Oparil S, Wright JT Jr, Roccella EJ, The Seventh Report of the Joint National 
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure, 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National High Blood Pressure Education Program 17 Prehypertension and Vascular-Renal Impairment248
Coordinating Committee. Seventh report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, 
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. JAMA. 2003;289:2560–72.
 3. Albarwani S, Al-Siyabi S, Tanira MO. Prehypertension: underlying pathology and therapeutic 
options. World J Cardiol. 2014;6:728–43.
 4. Tajeu GS, Booth JN, Colantonio LD, Gottesman RF, Howard G, Lackland DT, O’Brien 
E, Oparil S, Ravenell JE, Safford MM, Seals SR, Shimbo D, Shea S, Spruill TM, 
Tanner RM, Muntner P.  Incident cardiovascular disease among adults with blood 
pressure <140/90 mmHg. Circulation. 2017;136:798–812. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.117.027362.
 5. Jax TW. Metabolic memory: a vascular perspective. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2010 Sep;9:51.
 6. Dahl LK, Knudsen KD, Heine MA, Leitl GJ.  Effects of chronic excess salt ingestion. 
Modification of experimental hypertension in the rat by variations in the diet. Circ Res. 
1968;22:11–8.
 7. Oguchi H, Sasamura H, Shinoda K, Morita S, Kono H, Nakagawa K, Ishiguro K, Hayashi K, 
Nakamura M, Azegami T, Oya M, Itoh H. Renal arteriolar injury by salt intake contributes to 
salt memory for the development of hypertension. Hypertension. 2014;64:784–91.
 8. Lara LS, McCormack M, Semprum-Prieto LC, Shenouda S, Majid DS, Kobori H, Navar LG, 
Prieto MC.  AT1 receptor-mediated augmentation of angiotensinogen, oxidative stress, and 
inflammation in ANG II-salt hypertension. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2012;302:F85–94.
 9. Kobori H, Nishiyama A, Abe Y , Navar LG. Enhancement of intrarenal angiotensinogen in Dahl 
salt-sensitive rats on high salt diet. Hypertension. 2003;41:592–7.
 10. Susic D, Frohlich ED, Kobori H, Shao W, Seth D, Navar LG. Salt-induced renal injury in 
SHRs is mediated by AT1 receptor activation. J Hypertens. 2011;29:716–23.
 11. Lin L, Phillips WE, Manning RD.  Intrarenal Angiotensin II is associated with inflamma-
tion, renal damage and dysfunction in Dahl salt-sensitive hypertension. J Am Soc Hypertens. 
2009;3:306–14.
 12. Tenekecioglu E, Yilmaz M, Yontar OC, Karaagac K, Agca FV , Tutuncu A, Kuzeytemiz M, 
Bekler A, Senturk M, Aydin U, Demir S. Microalbuminuria in untreated prehypertension and 
hypertension without diabetes. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014;7(10):3420–9.
 13. Wang Q, Huang J, Sun Y , Zhang W, Gao Y , Yao W, Bian B, Li Y , Wu X, Niu K. Association 
of microalbuminuria with diabetes is stronger in people with prehypertension compared to 
those with ideal blood pressure. Nephrology (Carlton). 2017. [Epub ahead of print]. https://
doi.org/10.1111/nep.13082.
 14. Jia CF, Jiang YN, Yang ZQ, Sun XX, Yu Y , Wang H, Lu Y , Chen AJ, Wang ZQ. Ascending 
aortic elasticity and related risk factors study on prehypertension patients. Am J Hypertens. 
2017;30(1):61–6.
 15. Huang Y , Su L, Cai X, Mai W, Wang S, Hu Y , Wu Y , Tang H, Xu D. Association of all-
cause and cardiovascular mortality with prehypertension: a meta-analysis. Am Heart J. 
2014;167:160–8.
 16. Papadopoulos D, Mourouzis I, Kotrotsou A, Papazachou U, Sanidas E, Tsioufis K, Makris 
T. Hemostasis parameters disturbances in healthy individuals with prehypertension. Clin Exp 
Hypertens. 2012;34:385–8.
 17. Van Guilder GP. It is time to contend with the endothelial consequences of prehypertension. J 
Hum Hypertens. 2015;29(8):457.
 18. Garofalo C, Borrelli S, Pacilio M, Minutolo R, Chiodini P, De Nicola L, Conte G. Hypertension 
and prehypertension and prediction of development of decreased estimated GFR in the general 
population: a meta-analysis of cohort studies. Am J Kidney Dis. 2016;67:89–97.
 19. Huang Y , Cai X, Zhang J, Mai W, Wang S, Hu Y , Ren H, Xu D. Prehypertension and Incidence 
of ESRD: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014;63:76–83.
 20. Li Y , Xia P, Xu L, Wang Y , Chen L. A meta-analysis on prehypertension and chronic kidney 
disease. PLoS One. 2016;11:e0156575.
 21. Nakaya H, Sasamura H, Hayashi M, Saruta T. Temporary treatment of prepubescent rats with 
angiotensin inhibitors suppresses the development of hypertensive nephrosclerosis. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2001;12:659–66.
C. Dreyfuss-Tubiana et al.249
 22. Nakaya H, Sasamura H, Mifune M, Shimizu-Hirota R, Kuroda M, Hayashi M, Saruta 
T. Prepubertal treatment with angiotensin receptor blocker causes partial attenuation of hyper -
tension and renal damage in adult Dahl salt-sensitive rats. Nephron. 2002;91:710–8.
 23. The Sixth Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and 
Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC VI). Bethesda, MD: National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute; 1997. (NIH publication no. 98-4080).
 24. The Trials of Hypertension Prevention Collaborative Research Group. Effects of weight loss 
and sodium reduction intervention on blood pressure and hypertension incidence in over -
weight people with high-normal blood pressure: the Trials of Hypertension Prevention, phase 
II. Arch Intern Med. 1997;157:657–67.
 25. Hypertension Prevention Trial Research Group. The Hypertension Prevention Trial: three-year 
effects of dietary changes on blood pressure. Arch Intern Med. 1990;150:153–62.
 26. Jennings G, Nelson L, Nestel P, Esler M, Korner P, Burton D, Bazelmans J. The effects of 
changes in physical activity on major cardiovascular risk factors, hemodynamics, sympa-
thetic function, and glucose utilization in man: a controlled study of four levels of activity. 
Circulation. 1986;73:30–40.
 27. Neaton JD, Grimm RH Jr, Prineas RJ, Stamler J, Grandits GA, Elmer PJ, Cutler JA, Flack JM, 
Schoenberger JA, McDonald R, et al. Treatment of mild hypertension: final results. JAMA. 
1993;270:713–24.
 28. Appel LJ, Moore TJ, Obarzanek E, V ollmer WM, Svetkey LP, Sacks FM, Bray GA, V ogt TM, 
Cutler JA, Windhauser MM, Lin PH, Karanja N. A clinical trial of the effects of dietary pat-
terns on blood pressure. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:1117–24.
 29. Folkow B. Physiological aspects of primary hypertension. Physiol Rev. 1982;62:347–504.
 30. Panza JA, Casino PR, Kilcoyne CM, Quyyumi AA. Role of endothelium-derived nitric oxide 
in the abnormal endothelium-dependent vascular relaxation of patients with essential hyper -
tension. Circulation. 1993;87:1468–74.
 31. Egan B, Panis R, Hinderliter A, Schork N, Julius S. Mechanism of increased alpha adrenergic 
vasoconstriction in human essential hypertension. J Clin Invest. 1987;80:812–7.
 32. Julius S, Nesbitt S, Egan B, Kaciroti N, Schork MA, Grozinski M, Michelson E, TROPHY 
Study Group. Trial of preventing hypertension: design and 2-year progress report. Hypertension. 
2004;44:146–51.
 33. Julius S, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, Weber MA, Michelson EL, Kaciroti N, Black HR, Grimm RH 
Jr, Messerli FH, Oparil S, Schork MA. Feasibility of treating prehypertension with an angio-
tensin-receptor blocker. Trial of Preventing Hypertension (TROPHY) Study Investigators. N 
Engl J Med. 2006;354:1685–97.
 34. Lüders S, Schrader J, Berger J, Unger T, Zidek W, Böhm M, Middeke M, Motz W, Lübcke 
C, Gansz A, Brokamp L, Schmieder RE, Trenkwalder P, Haller H, Dominiak P, PHARAO 
Study Group. The PHARAO study: prevention of hypertension with the angiotensin-con-
verting enzyme inhibitor ramipril in patients with high-normal blood pressure: a prospective, 
randomized, controlled prevention trial of the German Hypertension League. J Hypertens. 
2008;26:1487–96.
 35. Lonn EM, Bosch J, Lopez-Jaramillo P, Zhu J, Liu L, Pais P, Diaz R, Xavier D, Sliwa K, Dans 
A, Avezum A, Piegas LS, Keltai K, Keltai M, Chazova I, Peters RJ, Held C, Yusoff K, Lewis 
BS, Jansky P, Parkhomenko A, Khunti K, Toff WD, Reid CM, Varigos J, Leiter LA, Molina 
DI, McKelvie R, Pogue J, Wilkinson J, Jung H, Dagenais G, Yusuf S. Blood-pressure lowering 
in intermediate-risk persons without cardiovascular disease. HOPE-3 Investigators. N Engl J 
Med. 2016;374:2009–20.
 36. Chow CK, Teo KK, Rangarajan S, Islam S, Gupta R, Avezum A, Bahonar A, Chifamba J, 
Dagenais G, Diaz R, Kazmi K, Lanas F, Wei L, Lopez-Jaramillo P, Fanghong L, Hassim Ismail 
N, Puoane T, Rosengren A, Szuba A, Temizhan A, Wielgosz A, Yusuf R, Yusufali A, McKee M, 
Liu L, Mony P, Yusuf S, PURE (Prospective Urban Rural Epidemiology) Study Investigators. 
Prevalence, awareness, treatment, and control of hypertension in rural and urban communities 
in high-, middle-, and low-income countries. JAMA. 2013;310:959–68.17 Prehypertension and Vascular-Renal Impairment251 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_18
E. Agabiti-Rosei ( *) · A. Paini · M. Salvetti 
Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy
e-mail: enrico.agabitirosei@unibs.it18Subclinical Vascular Damage 
in Prehypertension
Enrico Agabiti-Rosei, Anna Paini, and Massimo Salvetti
18.1  Introduction
Epidemiological data clearly indicate that the association between blood pressure 
(BP) and cardiovascular events is continuous [1 ], with a relation that is consistent 
in both men and women, among different racial groups, in young and elderly peo-
ple and therefore the distinction between normotension and hypertension is arbi-
trary. However in everyday practice, cut-off BP values are universally used [2 ]. The 
term prehypertension was proposed in 1939 on the basis of early studies that had 
demonstrated a relationship between blood pressure values recorded during physi-
cal examination for life insurance purposes and subsequent fatal and nonfatal 
events. In 2003, the JNC7 (Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on 
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure) [3 ] 
classified subjects with systolic blood pressure (SBP) between 120 and 139 mmHg 
with diastolic blood pressure (DBP) <90 mmHg or DBP between 80 and 89 mmHg 
with SBP <140 mmHg not taking antihypertensive drugs as having prehyperten-
sion. Similarly, European Hypertension Guidelines define “high-normal BP” (HN 
BP), as a SBP between 130 and 139 and/or a DBP between 85 and 89 mmHg. 
Despite the differences in cut-off values, studies have shown that both conditions 
are associated with a greater risk of developing hypertension, with a greater preva-
lence of organ damage, and with an increased risk of developing end stage renal 
disease and cardiovascular events [4 , 5].
Because little is known on the progression of organ damage during follow-up in 
patients with high-normal BP we considered it to be worthwhile to assess the preva-
lence of HN BP and of associated cardiovascular target organ damage (TOD) in 420 
subjects (age 50 ± 8 years, 46% males) from a general population sample living in 252
a small town in Northern Italy and who were participating in a prospective epide-
miological study aimed at measuring the association between CV risk factors and 
TOD (V obarno study). Normotension was defined as a SBP/DBP <130/85 mmHg, 
HN BP was defined as SBP/DBP ≥130/85 and <140/90 mmHg and hypertension 
(HT) as SBP/DBP ≥140/90 mmHg. A follow-up (FU) visit, laboratory examina-
tions, echocardiography and carotid intima-media thickness (IMT) measurement 
were performed after 9 years.
18.2  Baseline
At baseline 34% of subjects were normotensives, 36% were hypertensives and 30% 
(n = 126) of subjects were classified as HN. As compared to NT, subjects with HN 
BP were older, were more often male, and had a greater body mass index. 
Furthermore, as compared to NT subjects, those with HN BP had greater plasma 
glucose values, creatinine and uric acid levels (all p  <  0.05). The prevalence of 
metabolic syndrome was 3.5% in NT, 29.4% in HN and 34% in HT (p < 0.05 vs. NT 
for both HT and HN; p = ns for the comparison between HN and HT) (Fig.  18.1). 
Left ventricular mass index (LVMI, expressed in gm/m2 [7]) and relative wall thick-
ness (RWT) progressively increased form NT to HN to HT and, in particular, LVMI 
and RWT were significantly greater in HN as compared to NT (ANOV A p, with 
Bonferroni correction, <0.05) (Fig.  18.2). Carotid IMT (both meanmax and 
CBMMax) were greater in HT as compared to NT and HN (all p < 0.05). No signifi-
cant difference in IMT was observed between HN and NT.
0510152025303540
NT HN HTPrev alence of Metabolic Sy ndrome
*
NT
HN
HT
* p <0.0 5BP category  
at baselin e%*
Fig. 18.1 Prevalence of metabolic syndrome at baseline according to BP categories
E. Agabiti-Rosei et al.253
18.3  Follow-Up
A second visit was performed after a FU of 8.6 ± 2.2 years. Among subjects clas-
sified as NT at baseline, 34% had progressed to HT, 23% had HN BP, while 43% 
had normal BP (Fig.  18.3). Among those classified as HT at baseline, most (84%) 
were classified as hypertensive at FU visit, 11% had HN BP and 5% were 
NT. Interestingly, among the 126 subjects classified as HN at baseline, at follow-up 
visit 71% had progressed to HT, 18% had HN BP and only 11% had BP values 
within the normal range.
When cardiac organ damage was analysed at FU, subjects classified as having 
HN BP at baseline had a LVMI that was significantly greater than those classified as 
NT at baseline (Fig.  18.4). Similarly, in patients classified as HN at baseline, rela-
tive wall thickness at FU was greater than in NT (p < 0.05), indicating the develop-
ment of a more concentric geometry in these subjects. The E/A ratio of transmitral 
flow was lower and the isovolumic relaxation time was significantly greater in 
patients classified at baseline as HN BP as compared to NT; also left atrial dimen-
sions were greater in these patients than in NT, thus indicating a tendency to an 
earlier development of diastolic dysfunction in this group.
Also vascular damage was more prominent in subjects classified as having HN 
BP at baseline. In particular, both Meanmax and CBMMax IMT were significantly 
greater in subjects who had HN BP at baseline as compared to those classified as 
NT.  The greatest values were observed in patients classified as hypertensives at 
baseline (p at least <0.05 for all comparisons) (Fig. 18.5).
When changes over time in measures of TOD during the nine-year follow-up 
period were analysed, in subjects classified as HN BP at the baseline visit the pro-
gression of IMT was progressively greater from patients classified as NT, as HN BP 
1020304050
NT HN HTRWT
NT
HN
HTp at least <0.05
0.250.30.350.4
NT HN HTLVH/h 2.7
*
*
**
*
*
Fig. 18.2 Left ventricular mass and relative wall thickness at baseline according to BP category18 Subclinical Vascular Damage in Prehypertension254
HT
HN
NTBaseline
34% 36%
30%
Follow-up
High-Normal Hypertensive s
43%
23%34% 71%11%18%
84%11%5%Normotensives
45% treate d 39% treate d 51% treate d
Fig. 18.3 Percentage of patients with normal BP, with high-normal BP, and with arterial hyper -
tension, at baseline and at follow-up
020406080100120140160180*
*
*
NT
HN
HT
ANOVA * p at least <0.05LVM (g) LVMI
LVM/BSA (g/kg/ m2)LVMI
LVM/h (g/ m2.7)
NT HN HT NT HN HT NT HN HT*
*
**
*
*
BP category  
at baselin e
Fig. 18.4 Left ventricular mass at FU according to baseline BP category
E. Agabiti-Rosei et al.255
and as HT at baseline (p for trend <0.01). A similar trend was also observed for left 
ventricular mass index, but the finding did not reach statistical difference. When 
limiting the analysis to untreated patients (n = 295), the results remained substan-
tially unchanged for IMT, and were statistically significant (p < 0.05) also for the 
change of LVMI over time (Fig. 18.6).
**
IMT (mm )Meanmax CBMmax
*
00,20,40,60,811,21,4
NT
HN
HT**
*
ANOVA * p at least <0.05NT HN HT NT HN HTBP category  
at baselin e
Fig. 18.5 Carotid artery intima-media thickness at FU according to baseline BP category
Delta meanmax IM T
0.3
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
NT HN HT
NT HN HT–0.5
–1
–1.5
–2
–2.50.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0NT
HN
HTBP category  
at baselin emmp for trend<0.001Delta LVMi
g/m2.7p for trend<0.0 5
Fig. 18.6 Intima-media thickness and left ventricular mass index changes over time in subjects 
untreated at follow-up18 Subclinical Vascular Damage in Prehypertension256
 Conclusion
Our findings indicate that a significant proportion (30%) of apparently healthy 
subjects from an unselected sample of a general population in Northern Italy 
have HN BP, and that this group of subjects have higher BMI, and a worst car -
diovascular risk profile as compared to normotensives (higher plasma glucose, 
creatinine and uric acid) and that about one third of them have metabolic syn-
drome. Furthermore, our results confirm that these subjects frequently progress 
to hypertension: in fact, among the 126 subjects classified as HN at baseline, 
71% had progressed to HT after about 9 years, and only 11% had BP values 
within the normal range. Finally, our results indicate that progression of organ 
damage is more rapid in patients with high-normal blood pressure, with an 
increase in carotid intima-media thickness and in left ventricular mass index 
which is intermediate between that observed in normotensives and in hyperten-
sives. Our findings may contribute to explain [6–8] the increase in the risk of 
cardiovascular events observed in subjects with high-normal blood pressure and 
prehypertension.
References
 1. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, Peto R, Collins R, Prospective Studies Collaboration. 
Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of indi-
vidual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360:1903–13.
 2. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redon J, Zanchetti A, Bohm M, et al. 2013 ESH/ESC 
Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension: the task force for the management 
of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). J Hypertens. 2013;31(7):1281–357.
 3. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, Jones DW, 
Materson BJ, Oparil S, Wright JT Jr, Roccella EJ, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood 
Pressure, National High Blood Pressure Education Program Coordinating Committee. The 
Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and 
Treatment of High Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003;289(19):2560–72.
 4. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, Evans JC, O’Donnell CJ, Kannel WB, Levy D.  Impact 
of high-normal blood pressure on the risk of cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 
2001;345(18):1291–7.
 5. Kokubo Y , Kamide K, Okamura T, Watanabe M, Higashiyama A, Kawanishi K, et al. Impact 
of high-normal blood pressure on the risk of cardiovascular disease in a Japanese urban cohort: 
the Suita Study. Hypertension. 2008;52:652–9.
 6. Muiesan ML, Salvetti M, Rizzoni D, Castellano M, Donato F, Agabiti-Rosei E. Association of 
change in left ventricular mass with prognosis during long-term antihypertensive treatment. J 
Hypertens. 1995;13:1091–7.
 7. Devereux RB, Wachtell K, Gerdts E, Boman K, Nieminen MS, Papademetriou V , Rokkedal J, 
Harris K, Aurup P, Dahlöf B. Prognostic significance of left ventricular mass change during 
treatment of hypertension. JAMA. 2004;292:2350–6.
 8. Muiesan ML, Salvetti M, Monteduro C, Bonzi B, Paini A, Viola S, Poisa P, Rizzoni D, Castellano 
M, Agabiti-Rosei E. Left ventricular concentric geometry during treatment adversely affects 
cardiovascular prognosis in hypertensive patients. Hypertension. 2004;43:731–8.
E. Agabiti-Rosei et al.257 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_19
J. D. H. Goodman ( *) · I. B. Wilkinson · C. M. McEniery 
Experimental Medicine and Immunotherapeutics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
e-mail: jdhg3@medschl.cam.ac.uk19Systolic Hypertension in Y outh
James D. H. Goodman, Ian B. Wilkinson, 
and Carmel M. McEniery
19.1  Introduction
Isolated systolic hypertension (ISH) represents one of several different sub-forms of 
hypertension. It is the most common form of hypertension in the elderly and associ-
ated with increased large artery stiffness. However, ISH is also frequently found in 
young adults, especially males. According to the European Society of Hypertension 
(ESH) guidelines, ISH in youth [1] (0–15 years) is defined as SBP ≥95th and DBP 
<90th percentile for age, sex and height. In those aged 16 and over, ISH is defined 
as SBP ≥140 mmHg and DBP <90 mmHg [2].
The cardiovascular risks associated with hypertension in adulthood are widely 
recognised and accepted. This contrasts with the ongoing debate concerning the 
importance of ISH in young individuals, where questions remain over whether ISH 
represents artefactual or ‘spurious’ hypertension, a precursor to hypertension or a 
true hypertensive state with increased cardiovascular risk [3–6]. In addition, pro-
spective longitudinal trials of ISH in youth are lacking, which has caused uncer -
tainty regarding the clinical significance of the condition and whether 
pharmacological treatment is necessary. In part, the obesity epidemic in young 
adults and changes in nutrition and lifestyle habits have further contributed to the 
increased prevalence of ISH in youth, and hence there is added importance regard-
ing stratifying risk for these patients and their subsequent management.
This chapter provides an overview of the current understanding of ISH in youth, 
concentrating on the epidemiology, pathophysiological mechanisms, association 
with outcomes and treatment considerations.258
19.2  Prevalence of ISH in Y outh
Many observational studies now demonstrate that ISH is the most common form of 
hypertension in adolescents and young adults, especially in males. Staessen et al. [7 ] 
was one of the first investigators to identify the U-shaped association between ISH 
prevalence and age, with a 2–8% frequency of ISH in those aged around 30 years, 
0.1–0.8% in those aged 40–50, and over 12.6% in those aged over 70. In another 
study, Sorof [8 ] examined 2460 school children aged 12–16 years and found 17% of 
these to be hypertensive, of whom 88% (363/413) were found to have ISH. Mahmud 
and Feely [9 ] subsequently examined 174 medical students, confirming ISH in 11, 
although the authors referred to these individuals as having ‘spurious’ systolic hyper -
tension (see section below). Along with Sorof, they reported that the number of BP 
measurements at the time of establishing the formal diagnosis of ISH affects its fre-
quency. Mahmud and Feely stated that repeat BP measurements at intervals of 1 min 
after 5 min of rest reduced the ISH rate in young adults from 12.6% to 8.5% [8 , 9]. 
In addition, recent data has shown that young adults (18–39 years) with ISH had the 
slowest rates of receiving an initial diagnosis (of ISH), or starting antihypertensive 
medication, compared to those with isolated diastolic hypertension (IDH) or systolic 
diastolic hypertension (SDH) [10]. However, this could also reflect previously pub-
lished data showing coronary heart disease is more related to diastolic, rather than 
systolic blood pressure (SBP), although this topic is controversial [11, 12].
In 2003, Mallion [13] reported findings in 27783 untreated individuals in France, 
finding a 6.8% prevalence of ISH in males aged 25–29 years and a 0.3% prevalence 
in females of the same age. Then in 2005, the ENIGMA study recruited 1008 young 
adults in the UK (mean age 20 years of which 43% were male) observing a high 
prevalence of ISH in males and also noting these individuals to be taller, heavier and 
with a higher BMI compared to their normotensive controls [14]. In a further study 
of 750 young adults (aged 26–31) from the Atherosclerosis Risk in Young Adults 
study [15], ISH was identified in 57 men and 3 women, further confirming the pre-
dominance of ISH in men.
The HARVEST study [16], a prospective observational trial, enrolled Italian sub-
jects aged 18–45 years with hypertension, but excluded those with secondary forms 
of hypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular or renal disease. Out of 1141 subjects, 
the prevalence of ISH was 13.8%, IDH was 24.8%, and SDH was 61.4%. In agree-
ment with other studies, they confirmed a high prevalence of ISH in those who were 
young and male—48% in men aged 18–21. Other clinical characteristics of ISH in 
youth include smoking history [17], more active in sport [18] and those with a 
higher resting heart rate [19].
Data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 
suggests that not only is ISH in youth common but that the frequency is on the rise. 
For US adults aged 18–39, the prevalence of untreated ISH increased from 0.7% 
between 1988 and 1994 to 1.6% between 1999 and 2004 [17]. This further increased 
to 1.9% between 2005 and 2010, and overall, there was a 3.3% prevalence among 
males aged 18–39 compared to 0.5% for females of the same age [20]. Apart from 
male sex, smoking, African-American race and obesity were all associated with ISH 
in the latter NHANES study [17, 20, 21].
J. D. H. Goodman et al.259
19.3  Pathophysiology of ISH in Y outh
A number of pathophysiological mechanisms (as illustrated in Fig.  19.1) have been 
proposed as contributing to ISH in youth including enhanced pulse pressure ampli-
fication and increased sympathetic drive with increased cardiac output, stroke vol-
ume and heart rate. The following sections review the evidence base for these 
potential mechanisms in further detail.
19.4  ‘Spurious’ ISH in Y outh, Pulse Pressure Amplification 
and Central (Aortic) Blood Pressure
The term spurious (or pseudo) hypertension has traditionally been applied to elderly 
individuals where blood vessel calcification causes incompressibility of the artery 
[22, 23]. This subsequently leads to falsely elevated, or ‘spurious’ non-invasive bra-
chial cuff blood pressures, but normal intraarterial measurements when measured 
invasively. Spurious hypertension has also been applied to ISH in young individu-
als. O’Rourke et al. [18] were the first investigators to describe pseudo-hypertension 
in an observational study with six healthy young men aged 14–23 with ISH. Using 
the SphygmoCor system, the authors described these young individuals as having a 
‘normal’ aortic SBP (119  mmHg) but exaggerated central aortic-to-peripheral Genetic factors
↑ Pulse pressure
amplificationIsolated Systolic
HypertensionLifestyle and
environmental
factorsWhile coat effect
↑Sympathetic
drive
Solid evidence base for association with ISH↑Cardiac output
(↑stroke volume
and ↑ heart rate)
Hypothesised association with ISH - further evidence required
Fig. 19.1 Diagram showing proposed mechanisms of ISH in young adults
19 Systolic Hypertension in Youth260
pressure wave amplification and labelled the condition as pseudo-systolic hyperten-
sion. This was further examined by Mahmud and Feely [9] in 174 medical students, 
again using the SphygmoCor system to estimate the central blood pressure (CBP). 
Eleven of these were identified as having spurious systolic hypertension with a 
mean brachial SBP of 147 mmHg, a normal DBP (70 mmHg) and normal aortic 
pressure waveform and CBP of 116/70. In view of this ‘normal’ CBP, they sug-
gested that spurious systolic hypertension of youth is unlikely to carry increase 
cardiovascular risk and does not require antihypertensive treatment.
The physiological mechanism underlying ‘spurious’ systolic hypertension has 
been proposed as being due to highly elastic arteries with a low peripheral vas-
cular resistance, a high pulse pressure amplification and low wave reflection 
[24]. Alternative mechanisms which may explain increased amplification include 
differences in the transmission properties of the brachiocephalic system itself 
such as arterial stiffening [25]. It most commonly occurs in those who are male, 
younger, taller and obese and have a higher resting heart rate (partly because of 
higher heart rate) [24– 27]. This contrasts with the elderly where increased aortic 
stiffness and early return of reflected waves result in smaller pulse pressure 
amplification [24].
Both O’Rourke et al. [18] and Mahmud and Feely [9] based their definition of 
spurious systolic hypertension on a ‘normal’ systolic pressure in the aorta (i.e. 
119 mmHg and 116 mmHg, respectively). Central aortic pressure reflects the pres-
sure experienced by the major organs (heart, kidneys and brain). It should, there-
fore, better correlate with target organ damage, left ventricular hypertrophy/mass 
and cardiovascular disease when compared to brachial pressure. Ideally, invasive 
measurement with cardiac catheterisation is necessary to accurately record central 
BP. However, this is impractical, particularly in younger individuals, and, therefore, 
non-invasive estimation of CBP is performed using waveform analysis of distal 
arterial sites (e.g. carotid, brachial and radial). Analysis of these distal waveforms is 
performed automatically, with calibration using BP measurements obtained at the 
brachial artery. One problem with these non-invasive analyses is that the brachial 
systolic and diastolic cuff pressures required for calibration tend to underestimate 
the ‘true’ (invasive) brachial artery pressure, in turn leading to falsely low estimates 
of central pressure [28].
Leaving these technical points aside, using waveform analysis, McEniery et al. 
[14] showed that central SBP <110 mmHg corresponded to an optimal BP at the 
brachial artery (i.e. SBP <120 mmHg). The authors also observed that central SBP 
was ~22 mmHg higher in young subjects with ISH (121 mmHg) versus normoten-
sives (99 mmHg). Reference values for CBP and pulse pressure amplification have 
recently been published [29]. 45,426 subjects (from 77 studies) were grouped 
according to their brachial blood pressure—normotensives, with no cardiovascular 
risk factors (termed ‘normal population’), or hypertensives/normotensives with car -
diovascular risk factors (termed ‘reference population’). Males aged 20–29 years in 
the ‘normal population’ had a central SBP of 103 mmHg, similar to that shown by 
McEniery et al., and this compared to a central SBP of 110 mmHg in the ‘reference 
population’. Therefore it is apparent that the subjects with spurious ISH described 
J. D. H. Goodman et al.261
in the studies by O’Rourke et al. or Mahmud and Feely had significantly higher 
central SBP values than the ‘normal’ values identified by either McEniery et al. or 
Herbert et al. [30] (Table 19.1).
It is worth noting that calibration of distal waveforms using brachial BP is highly 
variable within individuals [27], and as such, caution is required when analysing CBP 
and pulse pressure amplification results for young adults with ISH. Notwithstanding 
this, the above data supports the fact that individuals with ISH are actually amplifying 
an already elevated central SBP rather than amplifying a ‘normal’ central SBP as 
previously suggested by O’Rourke et al. and Mahmud and Feely.
19.5  Sympathetic Nervous System Over-Activation in ISH
Stevo Julius was one of the first researchers to link a hyperkinetic state [34] to 
hypertension in the Tecumseh study, performed in 691 healthy subjects (mean age 
32.6 years). A hyperkinetic state (characterised by increased heart rate, increased 
cardiac index and higher plasma noradrenaline level) was found to be more com-
mon in those with borderline hypertension (37.4%) compared to normotensives 
(10%), thus suggesting a higher degree of sympathetic activity in borderline hyper -
tension. Further studies have supported this view demonstrating that cardiac output 
and heart rate are also elevated in borderline hypertension, with ISH being a pre-
dominant phenotype [35, 36]. However, other European studies have failed to show 
a positive association between ISH and a hyperkinetic state [32, 33].
Several studies [37, 38] support the hypothesis that in the early stages of hyper -
tension, sympathetic nervous system over-activation, or adrenergic overdrive, is 
present, particularly in young subjects, although not all studies support an associa-
tion [39, 40]. What is harder to know is whether this sympathetic activation pre-
cedes and subsequently drives an elevated blood pressure. Data from the 
Framingham Heart Study supports this, demonstrating that young adults with a 
resting tachycardia were more likely to develop hypertension over the following Table 19.1 Mean central and peripheral systolic blood pressures, in those with isolated systolic 
hypertension and normotension
ISH studies Central SBP (mmHg) Brachial SBP (mmHg)
ISH NT ISH NT
O’Rouke et al. (2000) [18] 119 – 153 (radial BP) –
Mahmud and Feely (2003) [9] 116 (males) 97 (males) 147 (males) 121 (males)
McEniery et al. (2005) [31] 121 99 147 116
Hulsen et al. (2006) [32] 117 106 145 126
Saladini et al. (2011) [33] 130 (ISH—high)a
114 (ISH—low)a113 152(ISH—high)a
146 (ISH—low)a124
Lurbe et al. (2016) [1] 104 90 132 105
ISH isolated systolic hypertension, NT normotension
aSaladini divided participants according to whether their central SBP, measured with applanation 
tonometry, was above (ISH—high) or below (ISH—low) the median (120.5 mmHg). The values 
here represent the mean of each group
19 Systolic Hypertension in Youth262
years compared to age-matched controls with a normal heart rate [41]. Furthermore, 
Lund-Johansen [42] demonstrated in men that those with borderline hypertension 
and a high cardiac output transformed over time to sustained essential hyperten-
sion via a cascade of haemodynamic adaptations including increased peripheral 
vascular resistance. If correct, cardiac output could potentially be a valuable bio-
marker and possible risk stratifier for future hypertension in youth, although fur -
ther longitudinal data in young adults who are in the early phases of BP elevation 
will be required [6 ].
The HARVEST study [43] also explored the role of the autonomic system in the 
development of sustained hypertension in 163 subjects with stage 1 hypertension 
and 28 normotensive controls. Those with reduced heart rate variability and signs of 
sympathetic predominance were more likely to develop sustained hypertension dur -
ing the 6-year follow-up period. Therefore, interventions aimed at modifying these 
systems may be beneficial, although it is likely that targeting other risk factors such 
as obesity, increased salt intake and a lack of physical exercise will also 
contribute.
19.6  White Coat Effect and ISH
The white coat effect may further contribute to the hyperkinetic state experienced 
by young adults with ISH. Young adults with hyperkinetic hypertension have sig-
nificantly higher office BPs compared to home BPs, whereas those with normoki-
netic hypertension and normotensive individuals show little difference between 
office and home BP [5]. The white coat effect was examined in 593 overweight 
children (mean age 12.2 years) [1]. The largest difference between office and central 
SBP corresponded to the ISH group where only 25% of participants had high cen-
tral SBP (compared to 50% in IDH group). The highest pulse pressure amplitude 
was in the ISH group. Furthermore, 75% of the ISH patients were in fact ‘white 
coat’ compared to just 10% with IDH. The association between ‘white coat’ hyper -
tension and ISH is not surprising given that stress results in sympathetic activation, 
leading to increased stroke volume and cardiac output. This results in a widened 
pulse pressure as SBP is elevated disproportionately to DBP [44]. The elevation in 
SBP thus results in an increased frequency of ISH in those with reported ‘white-
coat’ hypertension.
19.7  Other Pathophysiology in ISH in Y outh
The ENIGMA study describes the largest group of young adults in whom ISH and 
its underlying physiological mechanisms have been studied [14]. McEniery et al. 
measured peripheral and central BP, aortic pulse wave velocity, cardiac output, 
stroke volume and peripheral vascular resistance in 1008 young adults aged 
17–27 years. Compared to normotensive subjects, those with ISH showed higher 
peripheral and central BPs, aortic pulse wave velocity, cardiac output and stroke 
J. D. H. Goodman et al.263
volume. However, there were no differences in pulse pressure amplification, heart 
rate and peripheral vascular resistance between the groups. Compared to hyperten-
sive subjects, those with ISH had higher pulse pressure amplification, aortic pulse 
wave velocity, cardiac output and stroke volume, while mean blood pressure, heart 
rate and peripheral vascular resistance were all lower. The authors thus concluded 
that ISH results from an increased stroke volume and/or aortic stiffness. This con-
trasts with SDH, in which the major haemodynamic abnormality is an elevated 
peripheral vascular resistance.
Echocardiography studies in adolescents and children add weight to the above 
studies by showing an increase in cardiac output and stroke volume in those with 
persistently elevated SBP [45, 46]. Of note, those of African-American descent 
were not included in the ENIGMA study. Importantly, African-Americans [47] and 
blacks [48] tend to have higher peripheral vascular resistance from a younger age. 
This suggests that different haemodynamic mechanisms contribute to the develop-
ment of hypertension in different ethnicities, and therefore, the ENIGMA study 
results may not be generalizable to all ethnic groups.
In a follow-up analysis of the ENIGMA study cohort [49] in 2502 individuals, 
elevated cardiac output was the haemodynamic factor most strongly associated with 
increased SBP in lean individuals, but cardiac output was elevated in overweight 
individuals, irrespective of the level of BP. Instead, peripheral vascular resistance is 
distinguished between levels of SBP in overweight individuals, suggesting that dif-
ferent haemodynamic mechanisms are likely to drive increased SBP and ISH in 
young subjects, depending on body size. This may hold important implications for 
the treatment of ISH in the young, particularly in light of the growing obesity epi-
demic in the developed world and increasing prevalence of ISH—associated with 
obesity.
19.8  Association Between SBP and ISH in Y outh 
and Sustained Hypertension
SBP tracks from childhood into adulthood [50], and into later life [51], in almost all 
societies worldwide. A birth cohort study involving 975 individuals, with multiple 
BP measurements taken from 7 to 38 years, showed it was possible to identify four 
discrete trajectories based on SBP and retrospectively identify these from 7 years of 
age [52]. Those individuals in the two higher SBP trajectories were considered pre-
hypertensive and hypertensive, respectively, by the age of 38 and, in addition, had a 
worse metabolic profile. Smoking and elevated BMI were associated with increased 
SBP across all four groups. It is thus possible to predict, with a good degree of accu-
racy, which children will go on to develop hypertension in adulthood.
Specifically with regard to ISH, The HARVEST study [16] followed 1141 young 
adults (mean age 33.7 years) for a median of 72.9 months. Subjects were grouped 
according to their entry BP (ISH, IDH and SDH). When compared to normotensive 
subjects, the risk of developing hypertension according to their office BP was 5.2 
(95% CI 2.9–9.2) for SDH subjects, 2.6 (95% CI 1.5–4.5) among IDH subjects and 
19 Systolic Hypertension in Youth264
2.2 (95% CI 1.2–4.5) for ISH subjects. When sustained hypertension was measured 
with ambulatory BP (mean daytime BP ≥135/85), the odds ratios were 5.1 (95% CI 
3.1–8.2), 5.6 (95% CI 3.2–9.8) and 3.3 (95% CI 1.7–6.3), respectively. The results 
thus indicate that young adults with ISH are at increased risk of developing sus-
tained hypertension in later life, although the risk is smaller compared to those with 
SDH or IDH [3].
A further analysis of the HARVEST trial [33] after 9.5 years of follow-up dem-
onstrated that ISH subjects with high central BP had a risk of developing sustained 
hypertension and requiring treatment which was similar to those with SDH (OR 6.2; 
95% CI 1.8–21.1, p = 0.003). In contrast, those with ISH with a low central BP had 
a risk of developing sustained hypertension which was similar to that of normoten-
sives (OR 1.10, 95% CI 0.2–5.3, p = 0.90), indicating that there is potential value in 
using CBP as a risk stratifier in young adults. Indeed, Hulsen et al. [32] also observed 
that those younger subjects with ISH and a high central BP (≥121  mmHg vs. 
<121 mmHg) were at higher risk of developing hypertension that required treatment 
over a 10-year follow-up period (50% vs. 15.2%) [33]. However, it is worth noting 
the mean age in the HARVEST trial was 38.9 years, and prospective longitudinal 
data involving adolescents and young adults is required to confirm the true value of 
central BP as a stratifier of risk in young subjects.
19.9  Association Between SBP and ISH in Y outh 
and Cardiovascular Risk
The evidence outlined above establishes a strong association between ISH in youth 
and sustained hypertension in later life. It is not unexpected, therefore, that elevated 
SBP in youth increases cardiovascular risk in later life. Sundstrom et al. [53] fol-
lowed 1.2  million Swedish male military conscripts (mean age 18.4  years) over 
24 years finding a U-shaped relationship between total mortality and SBP (lowest 
risk at 130 mmHg) which was primarily driven by non-cardiovascular mortality, 
whereas there was a monotonic and positive association between cardiovascular 
mortality and SBP.  However, the relationship with DBP and total mortality was 
stronger compared to that of SBP indicating that DBP should not be ignored. In a 
study involving 8354 Glasgow University students (mean age 20.5 years) followed 
over a median of 41.3 years, both SBP and DBP were associated with increasing 
risk of CHD and CVD mortality, although this did not reach significance for 
DBP. However, regarding stroke mortality specifically, there was a strong positive 
association with DBP, but little correlation with SBP.  A further study involving 
10327 Harvard University former students (under age 30) showed that SBP 
>130 mmHg, elevated BMI, short body stature and smoking status predicted nonfa-
tal stroke during the follow-up period of 26–50 years [54].
While a number of studies, including those described, assess SBP and DBP indi-
vidually, there is a distinct lack of prospective studies in young people assessing 
hypertension by subtype, such as ISH. Two studies by Rutan [55] and Strandberg 
[56] prospectively assess ISH, although, in both of these studies, ISH was defined 
J. D. H. Goodman et al.265
as SBP ≥160 mmHg and DBP <90 mmHg. Rutan assessed 317871 white men aged 
35–57 years, showing those with ISH had the highest all-cause and cardiovascular 
mortality over a 6-year follow-up period. Strandberg examined 3267 Finnish men 
aged 30–45 years. The presence of ISH failed to predict either all-cause or cardio-
vascular mortality—although only 17 participants were actually classified as having 
ISH.
The best current evidence for the long-term risk associated with ISH in young 
subjects is provided by the Chicago Heart Association Detection in Industry 
Programme [19], which examined 15868 men and 11213 women aged 18–49 (mean 
age 34) during a 31-year follow-up. Participants were categorised into one of five 
groups (optimal BP, high-normal BP, IDH, SDH and ISH defined by SBP 
≥140  mmHg and DBP <90  mmHg) depending upon their seated brachial blood 
pressure and according to the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, 
Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (7th report) [57]. In total, there 
were 1728 deaths from cardiovascular disease, 1168 from coronary heart disease 
and 223 deaths from stroke. Overall, men with ISH had an increased risk of cardio-
vascular disease and coronary heart disease mortality when compared to optimal 
BP. The risk was similar to those with high-normal BP but lower compared to those 
with IDH and SDH. However, females with ISH showed a higher cardiovascular 
mortality risk when compared to all other BP categories apart from those with 
SDH. While it remains unclear how the pathophysiology of hypertension differs 
between sexes, it is known that at any given age from adolescence, females operate 
at a lower BP than males [58]. However, females tend to have a relatively higher 
CBP (due to greater central arterial wave augmentation and smaller pressure ampli-
fication) [4, 59], which may render females at greater cardiovascular risk for any 
given peripheral BP than males.
The results of the Chicago Heart Association study demonstrate for the first time 
that ISH in younger to middle-aged adults is associated with increased future risk 
and should not be considered an innocuous condition. Importantly, the study began 
before the onset of the current obesity epidemic and, therefore, has not captured the 
impact of ISH associated with obesity, which is increasing in prevalence [17], and 
may well drive even greater risk. By establishing an association between ISH in 
youth and increased cardiovascular risk, one can conclude that ISH is unlikely to be 
artefactual and, instead, necessitates active management and treatment.
19.10  Treatment of ISH in Y outh
Modifying diet (reducing salt intake), increasing physical activity, reducing weight 
and stopping smoking are recommended first-line options in young individuals with 
hypertension and are advocated, even if pharmacological therapy is necessary. 
Formal guidelines are otherwise lacking, and while the management of ISH is 
alluded to, there is no mention on the management or treatment of ISH relating to 
youth in either the UK National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) 
guidelines [60], the JNC guidelines [61] or the National Heart Foundation of 
19 Systolic Hypertension in Youth266
Australia guidelines [62]. The 2016 ESH guidelines for children and adolescents [2] 
do acknowledge the lack of understanding regarding prognosis and treatment in 
young adults with ISH. Lifestyle modifications and close monitoring are suggested, 
whereas pharmacological therapy is not, unless there are hypertensive symptoms or 
target organ damage. Instead, the ESH guidelines suggest that aortic BP measure-
ments may be useful in the assessment of those with ISH (without target organ 
damage) but do not provide further guidance regarding management. Stratifying 
risk according to CBP is promising but lacks universally agreed reference ranges 
and widespread uptake, particularly in primary care settings, and suffers from a lack 
of evidence in the area.
The underlying pathophysiology in ISH would suggest that reducing cardiac out-
put and/or aortic stiffness would be reasonable therapeutic options. Indeed, beta 
blockers would seem sensible, and propranolol, labetalol and nebivolol all reduce 
SBP, DBP and cardiac output in healthy, normotensive individuals (average age 32) 
[63]. However, non-vasodilating beta blockers (such as atenolol) show less benefit 
in reducing central aortic pressure when compared to newer beta blockers that either 
simultaneously block alpha receptors (carvedilol) or cause vasodilation via nitric 
oxide stimulation (nebivolol) [64–66]. The results of two comprehensive meta-anal-
yses [67, 68], along with comparison studies including the ASCOT trial [69], dem-
onstrate that atenolol is inferior to other major antihypertensive drug classes in 
preventing cardiovascular events. In addition, haemodynamic and physiological 
effects of selective B1 antagonists in young adults are poorly understood, and there 
may be long-term risks associated with lowering cardiac output in children although, 
as yet, data are very sparse and this area of research is poorly understood.
Once established, hypertension is irreversible, and therefore strategies aimed at 
preventing or delaying the condition from an early stage are of primary importance. 
Targeting key mechanisms underlying ISH in the young may well lead to more 
effective BP control and reduce cardiovascular risk. The lack of treatment guidance 
reflects underlying uncertainty, both in terms of the optimum treatment strategy and 
future prognosis, due to a lack of long-term prospective studies.
 Conclusion
Evidence increasingly points towards ISH in youth being associated with sus-
tained hypertension in adulthood and thus carries an increased cardiovascular 
risk. Standardised screening investigations for underlying causes and target 
organ damage, plus ambulatory blood pressure monitoring to confirm ISH, 
remain first-line investigations. Measurement of CBP should help to provide 
additional evidence regarding underlying risk and target organ damage and to 
confirm or refute true ISH (rather than white coat); however its reproducibility 
and relevance as a marker of risk remain questionable.
Once confirmed then ISH should be actively managed with lifestyle advice. 
While the long-term risks and benefits of pharmacological treatment associated 
with ISH in the elderly are undisputed, the evidence of antihypertensive drugs in 
ISH in youth remains poorly supported by both the literature and current interna-
tional hypertension guidelines and has been the subject of continued debate. 
J. D. H. Goodman et al.267
Nevertheless, pharmacological therapy should be initiated in this group of 
patients to achieve a target BP within the designated range.
Studies in this chapter draw their data from a wide range of ages from chil-
dren to middle-aged adults. Drawing direct comparisons and comparing outcome 
data between these studies are challenging, as SBP naturally increases into and 
throughout adult life, and therefore assessing future cardiovascular risk for an 
otherwise identical individual, aged either 18 or 35 years with the same SBP of 
145 mmHg, is markedly different. Furthermore, the use of risk calculators in 
deciding whether to initiate treatment is not suitable in adolescents or young 
adults, due to their very low absolute risks (e.g. over 10–20 years).
Elevated cardiac output (with increased stroke volume and heart rate) and 
increased sympathetic activation, rather than pulse pressure amplification, are 
the dominant haemodynamic traits in children, adolescents and young adults 
with ISH. These may serve as useful biomarkers of future risk. Further, long-
term prospective studies with ISH subjects, involving different ethnic groups, 
and with hard end points, are required to better understand the pathophysiology, 
natural history and clinical consequences of ISH in youth.
References
 1. Lurbe E, et al. Central blood pressure and pulse wave amplification across the spectrum of 
peripheral blood pressure in overweight and obese youth. J Hypertens. 2016;34(7):1389–95.
 2. Lurbe E, et al. European Society of Hypertension guidelines for the management of high blood 
pressure in children and adolescents. J Hypertens. 2016;34(10):1887–920.
 3. Saladini F, Palatini P. Isolated systolic hypertension in young individuals: pathophysiological 
mechanisms, prognostic significance, and clinical implications. High Blood Press Cardiovasc 
Prev. 2017;24(2):133–9.
 4. Yano Y , Lloyd-Jones DM. Isolated systolic hypertension in young and middle-aged adults. 
Curr Hypertens Rep. 2016;18(11):78.
 5. Lurbe E, Redon J. Isolated systolic hypertension in young people is not spurious and should be 
treated: con side of the argument. Hypertension. 2016;68(2):276–80.
 6. McEniery CM, et al. Isolated systolic hypertension in young people is not spurious and should 
be treated: pro side of the argument. Hypertension. 2016;68(2):269–75.
 7. Staessen J, Amery A, Fagard R.  Isolated systolic hypertension in the elderly. J Hypertens. 
1990;8(5):393–405.
 8. Sorof JM, et al. Isolated systolic hypertension, obesity, and hyperkinetic hemodynamic states 
in children. J Pediatr. 2002;140(6):660–6.
 9. Mahmud A, Feely J. Spurious systolic hypertension of youth: fit young men with elastic arter -
ies. Am J Hypertens. 2003;16(3):229–32.
 10. Johnson HM, et al. Differential diagnosis and treatment rates between systolic and diastolic 
hypertension in young adults: a multidisciplinary observational study. J Clin Hypertens 
(Greenwich). 2015;17(11):885–94.
 11. Bulpitt CJ.  Is systolic pressure more important than diastolic pressure? J Hum Hypertens. 
1990;4(5):471–6.
 12. Pickering TG, et  al. Recommendations for blood pressure measurement in humans and 
experimental animals: part 1: blood pressure measurement in humans: a statement for profes-
sionals from the Subcommittee of Professional and Public Education of the American Heart 
Association Council on High Blood Pressure Research. Hypertension. 2005;45(1):142–61.
19 Systolic Hypertension in Youth268
 13. Mallion JM, et al. Isolated systolic hypertension: data on a cohort of young subjects from a 
French working population (IHPAF). J Hum Hypertens. 2003;17(2):93–100.
 14. McEniery CM, et al. Increased stroke volume and aortic stiffness contribute to isolated systolic 
hypertension in young adults. Hypertension. 2005;46(1):221–6.
 15. Oren A, et al. The Atherosclerosis Risk in Young Adults (ARYA) study: rationale and design. 
Eur J Epidemiol. 2003;18(7):715–27.
 16. Saladini F, et al. Natural history of hypertension subtypes in young and middle-age adults. Am 
J Hypertens. 2009;22(5):531–7.
 17. Grebla RC, et al. Prevalence and determinants of isolated systolic hypertension among young 
adults: the 1999–2004 US National Health And Nutrition Examination Survey. J Hypertens. 
2010;28(1):15–23.
 18. O'Rourke MF, Vlachopoulos C, Graham RM. Spurious systolic hypertension in youth. Vasc 
Med. 2000;5(3):141–5.
 19. Yano Y , et  al. Isolated systolic hypertension in young and middle-aged adults and 31-year 
risk for cardiovascular mortality: the Chicago Heart Association Detection Project in Industry 
study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65(4):327–35.
 20. Liu X, Rodriguez CJ, Wang K. Prevalence and trends of isolated systolic hypertension among 
untreated adults in the United States. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2015;9(3):197–205.
 21. Franklin SS, et al. Blood pressure categories, hypertensive subtypes, and the metabolic syn-
drome. J Hypertens. 2006;24(10):2009–16.
 22. Sutton-Tyrrell K, et al. Relationship of ankle blood pressures to cardiovascular events in older 
adults. Stroke. 2008;39(3):863–9.
 23. Taguchi JT, Suwangool P. “Pipe-stem” brachial arteries. A cause of pseudohypertension. 
JAMA. 1974;228(6):733.
 24. Avolio AP, et al. Role of pulse pressure amplification in arterial hypertension: experts’ opinion 
and review of the data. Hypertension. 2009;54(2):375–83.
 25. Cockcroft JR, McEniery CM, Wilkinson IB. Pseudo hypertension of youth: too much of a 
good thing? Am J Hypertens. 2003;16(3):262–4.
 26. Protogerou AD, et al. Increased pulse pressure amplification in treated hypertensive subjects 
with metabolic syndrome. Am J Hypertens. 2007;20(2):127–33.
 27. McEniery CM, et al. Central pressure: variability and impact of cardiovascular risk factors: the 
Anglo-Cardiff Collaborative Trial II. Hypertension. 2008;51(6):1476–82.
 28. McEniery CM, et al. Central blood pressure: current evidence and clinical importance. Eur 
Heart J. 2014;35(26):1719–25.
 29. Herbert A, et al. Establishing reference values for central blood pressure and its amplifica-
tion in a general healthy population and according to cardiovascular risk factors. Eur Heart J. 
2014;35(44):3122–33.
 30. McEniery CM, Wilkinson IB, Cockcroft JR. Systolic hypertension in young adults: spurious 
definition of a genuine condition. J Hypertens. 2006;24(11):2316–7. author reply 2317-9.
 31. McEniery CM, et al. Normal vascular aging: differential effects on wave reflection and aor -
tic pulse wave velocity: the Anglo-Cardiff Collaborative Trial (ACCT). J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2005;46(9):1753–60.
 32. Hulsen HT, et  al. Spurious systolic hypertension in young adults; prevalence of high bra-
chial systolic blood pressure and low central pressure and its determinants. J Hypertens. 
2006;24(6):1027–32.
 33. Saladini F, et al. Isolated systolic hypertension of young-to-middle-age individuals implies a 
relatively low risk of developing hypertension needing treatment when central blood pressure 
is low. J Hypertens. 2011;29(7):1311–9.
 34. Julius S, et  al. Hyperkinetic borderline hypertension in Tecumseh, Michigan. J Hypertens. 
1991;9(1):77–84.
 35. Messerli FH, et  al. Borderline hypertension: relationship between age, hemodynamics and 
circulating catecholamines. Circulation. 1981;64(4):760–4.
 36. Messerli FH, et al. Borderline hypertension and obesity: two prehypertensive states with ele-
vated cardiac output. Circulation. 1982;66(1):55–60.
J. D. H. Goodman et al.269
 37. Esler M, et al. Assessment of human sympathetic nervous system activity from measurements 
of norepinephrine turnover. Hypertension. 1988;11(1):3–20.
 38. Grassi G, Mark A, Esler M. The sympathetic nervous system alterations in human hyperten-
sion. Circ Res. 2015;116(6):976–90.
 39. Rea RF, Hamdan M. Baroreflex control of muscle sympathetic nerve activity in borderline 
hypertension. Circulation. 1990;82(3):856–62.
 40. Schobel HP, et al. Evidence against elevated sympathetic vasoconstrictor activity in borderline 
hypertension. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1998;9(9):1581–7.
 41. Gudmundsdottir H, et  al. Do screening blood pressure and plasma catecholamines predict 
development of hypertension? Twenty-year follow-up of middle-aged men. Blood Press. 
2008;17(2):94–103.
 42. Lund-Johansen P. Haemodynamics in essential hypertension. Clin Sci (Lond). 1980;59(Suppl 
6):343s–54s.
 43. Palatini P, et al. Evolution of blood pressure and cholesterol in stage 1 hypertension: role of 
autonomic nervous system activity. J Hypertens. 2006;24(7):1375–81.
 44. Yoon HJ, et al. Can pulse pressure predict the white-coat effect in treated hypertensive patients? 
Clin Exp Hypertens. 2012;34(8):555–60.
 45. Sinaiko AR, et al. Cardiac status of adolescents tracking with high and low blood pressure 
since early childhood. J Hypertens Suppl. 1986;4(5):S378–80.
 46. Schieken RM, Clarke WR, Lauer RM. The cardiovascular responses to exercise in children 
across the blood pressure distribution. The Muscatine study. Hypertension. 1983;5(1):71–8.
 47. Dysart JM, et al. Ethnic differences in the myocardial and vascular reactivity to stress in nor -
motensive girls. Am J Hypertens. 1994;7(1):15–22.
 48. Soto LF, et al. Echocardiographic functions and blood pressure levels in children and young 
adults from a biracial population: the Bogalusa Heart Study. Am J Med Sci. 1989;297(5):271–9.
 49. Middlemiss JE, et al. Mechanisms underlying elevated SBP differ with adiposity in young 
adults: the Enigma study. J Hypertens. 2016;34(2):290–7.
 50. Chen X, Wang Y . Tracking of blood pressure from childhood to adulthood: a systematic review 
and meta-regression analysis. Circulation. 2008;117(25):3171–80.
 51. Wills AK, et  al. Population heterogeneity in trajectories of midlife blood pressure. 
Epidemiology. 2012;23(2):203–11.
 52. Theodore RF, et  al. Childhood to early-midlife systolic blood pressure trajectories: 
early-life predictors, effect modifiers, and adult cardiovascular outcomes. Hypertension. 
2015;66(6):1108–15.
 53. Sundstrom J, et al. Association of blood pressure in late adolescence with subsequent mortal-
ity: cohort study of Swedish male conscripts. BMJ. 2011;342:d643.
 54. Paffenbarger RS Jr, Wing AL. Chronic disease in former college students. XI. Early precursors 
of nonfatal stroke. Am J Epidemiol. 1971;94(6):524–30.
 55. Rutan GH, et al. Mortality associated with diastolic hypertension and isolated systolic hyper -
tension among men screened for the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial. Circulation. 
1988;77(3):504–14.
 56. Strandberg TE, et  al. Isolated diastolic hypertension, pulse pressure, and mean arte-
rial pressure as predictors of mortality during a follow-up of up to 32 years. J Hypertens. 
2002;20(3):399–404.
 57. Chobanian A V , et al. Seventh report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, 
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. Hypertension. 2003;42(6):1206–52.
 58. Wiinberg N, et al. 24-h ambulatory blood pressure in 352 normal Danish subjects, related to 
age and gender. Am J Hypertens. 1995;8(10 Pt 1):978–86.
 59. Shim CY , et al. Sex differences in central hemodynamics and their relationship to left ventricu-
lar diastolic function. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57(10):1226–33.
 60. Ritchie LD, Campbell NC, Murchie P.  New NICE guidelines for hypertension. BMJ. 
2011;343:d5644.
19 Systolic Hypertension in Youth270
 61. James PA, et al. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management of high blood pressure in 
adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint National Committee (JNC 
8). JAMA. 2014;311(5):507–20.
 62. Gabb GM, Mangoni AA, Arnolda L. Guideline for the diagnosis and management of hyperten-
sion in adults—2016. Med J Aust. 2017;206(3):141.
 63. Cheymol G, et al. Pharmacokinetics of beta-adrenoceptor blockers in obese and normal volun-
teers. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1997;43(6):563–70.
 64. Sabovic M, Safar ME, Blacher J. Is there any additional prognostic value of central blood pres-
sure wave forms beyond peripheral blood pressure? Curr Pharm Des. 2009;15(3):254–66.
 65. McEniery CM.  Antihypertensive drugs and central blood pressure. Curr Hypertens Rep. 
2009;11(4):253–9.
 66. Soanker R, et al. Effect of beta-1-blocker, nebivolol, on central aortic pressure and arterial 
stiffness in patients with essential hypertension. Indian J Pharm. 2012;44(3):407–11.
 67. Carlberg B, Samuelsson O, Lindholm LH.  Atenolol in hypertension: is it a wise choice? 
Lancet. 2004;364(9446):1684–9.
 68. Lindholm LH, Carlberg B, Samuelsson O. Should beta blockers remain first choice in the treat-
ment of primary hypertension? A meta-analysis. Lancet. 2005;366(9496):1545–53.
 69. Dahlof B, et al. Prevention of cardiovascular events with an antihypertensive regimen of amlo-
dipine adding perindopril as required versus atenolol adding bendroflumethiazide as required, 
in the Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial-Blood Pressure Lowering Arm (ASCOT-
BPLA): a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;366(9489):895–906.
J. D. H. Goodman et al.271 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_20
R. Aghamohammadzadeh ( *) · A. M. Heagerty 
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
e-mail: reza.zadeh@manchester.ac.uk20The Role of Perivascular Fat in Raising 
Blood Pressure in Obesity and Diabetes
Reza Aghamohammadzadeh and Anthony M. Heagerty
Abbreviations
ACE Angiotensin converting enzyme
ADRF Adipose-derived relaxing factor
AMPK 5′ Adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase
BMI Body mass index
BP Blood pressure
CNS Central nervous system
eNOS Endothelial nitric oxide synthase
G6PD Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
MCP-1 Monocyte chemotactic protein-1
MetS Metabolic syndrome
MR Mineralocorticoid receptor
NADPH Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NO Nitric oxide
NOS Nitric oxide synthase
OSA Obstructive sleep apnoea
PAME Palmitic acid methyl ester
PV AT Perivascular adipose tissue
RAAS Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
ROS Reactive oxygen species
SHR Spontaneously hypertensive rat
SNS Sympathetic nervous system
WC Waist circumference272
20.1  The Clinical Problem
Obesity has more than doubled since 1980, with nearly 2 billion overweight (39%) 
and 600 million obese (13%) adults worldwide [1]. In England nearly a quarter and 
in the USA close to a third of all adults are obese [2, 3].
Our contemporary understanding of obesity focuses on our ancestors and the fact 
that fat was the energy store developed in times of plenty which could then be uti-
lised during times of famine. This theory suggests that genes predisposing to obe-
sity would confer survival benefits and such individuals would live long enough to 
reproduce which is often seen as nature’s ultimate aim. Whilst adaptive variations in 
weight in the animal kingdom continue to serve their pro-survival purpose, we are 
observing a worrying trend in weight gain often associated with diseases that 
shorten the lifespan of the affected individual or at the very least don’t confer any 
survival benefits. Susceptible individuals are no longer exposed to periods of famine 
and are instead able to access easily high energy foods without expending much 
energy [4, 5]. Hunting and gathering food has been replaced by as little effort as a 
simple click of a button on the computer or a short drive to the nearest supermarket. 
In the hibernating mammal, short-term obesity and insulin resistance help direct 
glucose to the brain to keep the animal alive; however obesity has inflicted the mod-
ern man with chronic illnesses with significant associated cardiovascular morbidity 
and mortality, often requiring treatments such as polypharmacy or surgery in the 
extreme cases [6].
A clue to the complexity of obesity-related disorders is that whilst the presence 
of obesity is thought to be detrimental to health, simple and intuitive measurements 
such as BMI, waist circumference and waist-to-hip ratio do not improve cardiovas-
cular disease risk prediction substantially when information such as blood pressure, 
lipid profile and a history of diabetes are available [7]. This highlights the fact that 
there is more to obesity than the shape or size of the individual and there may well 
be obese individuals whose cardiovascular risk profile is not particularly adverse. 
This cohort of individuals has been labelled as the ‘metabolically healthy obese’. A 
better understanding of the physiology of these individuals will no doubt help guide 
future therapies to potentially transform those with MetS into ‘metabolically 
healthy’ individuals without resorting to drastic measure to achieve significant 
weight loss. Nonetheless, obesity and metabolic syndrome remain strong predictors 
of future cardiovascular events. In those with disproportionately high WC for a 
given BMI, assessment of further cardiometabolic risk factors is encouraged [8], 
thus highlighting the specific properties of individual fat depots and providing clues 
that certain depots convey a worse risk profile.
Hypertension affects nearly one third of the US population [9 ], and in England it 
was reported in over 45% of those in the obese group, compared with around 30% of 
the overweight and 15% of those in the normal weight category [2 ]. Globally over a 
billion people have raised blood pressure, that is, 24% of the adult male and 20% of 
adult female population in 2015 [10]. The Framingham Heart Study identifies obesity 
as a contributory factor in 60–70% of essential hypertension [11], and obese individu-
als have a 3.5-fold increase in the likelihood of developing hypertension [12].
R. Aghamohammadzadeh and A. M. Heagerty273
The co-occurrence of obesity and hypertension has prompted the scientific com-
munity to further investigate the pathophysiology of obesity-related hypertension as 
well as its links to diabetes. Contemporary hypotheses have described prediabetes 
as a disease of the microvasculature under the influence of its surrounding perivas-
cular adipose tissue (PV AT).
There are many mechanisms via which obesity can lead to hypertension. In the 
acute phase, both bolus oral ingestion and the intravenous infusion of fat by normo-
tensive obese individuals result in a significant rise in systolic blood pressure, atten-
uated endothelial function, increased oxidative stress markers and activation of the 
sympathetic nervous system [13].
Genetic causes of obesity are rare, and the majority of cases are a consequence 
of indulgence in readily available and calorie-rich foods which provide significant 
proportion of the recommended daily allowance of salt and fat. High-salt diets 
accelerate the development of hypertension in diet-induced obese rats without rais-
ing the ceiling of the systolic blood pressure beyond that observed in diet-induced 
obese rats fed a low-salt diet [14]. This effect may be a consequence of the increase 
in oxidative stress levels in the vasculature as evidenced by significantly higher 
superoxide levels within aortic rings of high-fat and high-salt diet fed animals.
There are numerous facilitators of obesity-related hypertension. These include 
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), the overactive sympathetic ner -
vous system, metabolic dysregulation including hyperinsulinaemia, adipokine 
imbalance, and PV AT damage. There is currently no direct evidence to suggest that 
a loss of PV AT vasorelaxant function leads to systemic hypertension in man, but we 
have reported a correlation between the loss of PV AT vasorelaxant effect and a rise 
in BP in a murine model of obesity [15] and believe that such a correlation might 
also exist in man.
20.2  Fat Depots
This chapter reviews the role of perivascular adipose tissue in MetS, but it is vital to 
point out that the distribution of fat around the body determines not only the obese 
phenotype but also its consequences. Intra-abdominal and visceral fat depots have 
been linked with an adverse cardiometabolic profile and mortality associated with 
obesity [16, 17]. The total amount of internal fat rises with increasing subcutaneous 
adiposity, but even individuals classed as thin may have more visceral fat than some 
obese individuals. Fat accumulation in some fat depots seems to be more favour -
able. Increased gluteofemoral fat mass negatively correlates with levels of inflam-
matory cytokines and is positively linked to raised concentrations of adipokines 
resulting in decreased metabolic and cardiovascular risk [18]. In human experi-
ments, this is the fat depot that is most easily accessible and studied in ex  vivo 
protocols.
Adipose tissue depots have unique inflammatory profiles. Perivascular adipose 
tissue from murine aortic arch expresses lower levels of adipocyte-associated genes 
compared with subcutaneous and visceral fat [19]. Visceral adipose tissue exhibits 20 The Role of Perivascular Fat in Raising Blood Pressure in Obesity and Diabetes274
a more inflammatory profile with a higher macrophage content than subcutaneous 
fat [20]. This may somewhat explain the stronger link between central obesity and 
hypertension than between BMI and raised blood pressure [21].
Epicardial adipose tissue thickness correlates well with waist circumference, vis-
ceral adipose tissue mass, fasting insulin and diastolic blood pressure [22, 23] and has 
been shown to be significantly greater in patients with MetS than those without [24].
PV AT surrounding human coronary vessels is made up of smaller, more irregu-
larly shaped adipocytes as compared with visceral and subcutaneous fat depots. 
Coronary PV AT secretes lower levels of adiponectin and higher levels of cytokines 
such as IL-8 and IL-6 as compared with subcutaneous and visceral adipocytes [19]. 
Exposure to IL-6 has been linked with a reduction in adiponectin production by 
human adipocytes [25]. Interestingly, there is a high level of macrophage infiltration 
and lower adiponectin mRNA levels in the epicardial fat tissue of patients with 
coronary artery disease [26]. Coronary PV AT contains higher levels of monocyte 
chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) as compared with visceral and subcutaneous tissue 
[19, 27–29]. Lower levels of adiponectin in epicardial tissue have also been associ-
ated with hypertension [30, 31] and increased risk of myocardial infarction [32].
In this chapter we will focus mainly on PV AT as the fat depot of interest.
20.3  Perivascular Adipose Tissue
Adipocytes surround almost every blood vessel in the body. They are biological active 
cells that produce and secrete a number of molecules called adipokines with meta-
bolic and vasoactive properties. In the adult man, these are predominantly white adi-
pocytes and form the perivascular adipose tissue or PV AT.  In 2005, Yudkin et  al. 
proposed that PV AT might be the link between obesity and the development of diabe-
tes and MetS as a consequence of an adverse effect on the microvasculature [33]. In 
health, PV AT could produce adipokines that influence metabolism and the control of 
local microvessel tone. They suggested that the loss of these adipokines would result 
in a change in vessel function and development of insulin resistance. The effect of 
circulating insulin on NO-mediated vasodilatation is of paramount importance in 
modulating the postprandial increase in nutritive flow, and the authors postulated that 
this could be challenged by the paracrine action of adipokines released from local fat 
stores in obesity. They further highlighted the role inflammation may play and that 
higher concentrations of TNF-α  in obesity could disrupt the crosstalk between fat and 
blood vessels. Only recently we have been able to provide the evidence in support of 
the Yudkin hypothesis, but we are far from identifying definitive therapeutic strategies 
to treat prediabetes and pre-hypertension before the onset of MetS.
The effect of PV AT on its surrounding vasculature is not only dependent on the 
properties of the adipocytes but also the presence of a variety of cells coexisting 
within PV AT.  In chronic inflammatory conditions such as obesity, there is an 
increase in numbers of inflammatory cells including macrophages and eosinophils 
within PV AT which distorts the properties of ‘healthy PV AT’ and leads to a less 
favourable profile.
R. Aghamohammadzadeh and A. M. Heagerty275
At first glance, a simple review of the vast literature on the properties of PV AT 
can appear somewhat confusing or contradictory. There are reports of both vasore-
laxant and pro-contractile properties which can bemuse the casual reader. We know 
now that PV AT can behave differently, depending on the specific species and vascu-
lar beds being studied. The distinctive properties of PV AT also depend on the agents 
used to the tissue. In health, PV AT from both human and murine mesenteric vessel 
beds exerts a vasorelaxant effect. That is to say that in a simple organ bath or myog-
raphy experiment, in the presence of PV AT, the adjacent small vessel constricts 
significantly less than a skeletonised vessel when stimulated with a vasoconstrictor 
agent. In obesity this effect is not observed.
There is evidence to suggest that the vasorelaxant property is due to a number of 
molecules being secreted from PV AT as well as a degree of contribution from the 
‘sponging effect’ of PV AT forming a physical barrier and obstructing the flow of the 
provocative agents from reaching the vessel. We have shown previously that dam-
age to the PV AT vasorelaxant property directly correlates with BP elevation in a 
murine model of obesity [15]. This is a significant finding as it is the first evidence 
of a correlation between PV AT function and blood pressure. Quantifying PV AT 
vasorelaxant effect is a novel endeavour. In brief, animals were fed a high-fat diet to 
establish an environmental model of obesity. Vessel segments from their mesenteric 
beds were assessed, and the degree of contraction of their adjacent skeletonised ves-
sel was quantified as a ratio of the degree of contraction of the PV AT-intact segment 
of the same vessel to KPSS (potassium-rich physiological saline solution). We 
reported a correlation between this derived figure and systemic BP. This means that 
as the animals gained weight and lost their PV AT vasorelaxant effect, there was an 
attendant elevation in blood pressure. This remains the most convincing evidence of 
a link between weight gain and PV AT function correlating with a rise in BP.
20.4  PVAT as a Vasorelaxant Organ
We have already discussed that healthy PV AT exerts a vasorelaxant effect on adjacent 
microvasculature when subject to vasoconstrictors [34]. This is true in the majority of 
vascular beds. A number of mechanisms have been proposed to describe this phenom-
enon with just as many outstanding questions requiring further investigation.
Experimental protocols have identified both endothelium-dependent and endo-
thelium-independent [35] mechanisms, and a number of molecules have been impli-
cated which will be discussed briefly in this chapter.
White and brown adipocytes have similar yet distinguishably different secretion 
profiles [36], but the vasorelaxant property of PV AT has been documented in both 
white and brown tissues [37, 38].
Adiponectin is the most abundant adipokine with a significant vasorelaxant 
effect on small arteries and is able to reverse endothelial dysfunction in diet-induced 
obese rats via the AMPK-eNOS pathway [39]. Adiponectin levels are low in hyper -
tension and improve with antihypertensive treatment [40]. Adiponectin secreted 
from murine PV AT modulates the tone of the adjoining microvessel segment by 20 The Role of Perivascular Fat in Raising Blood Pressure in Obesity and Diabetes276
functioning as an adipose-derived relaxant factor or ADRF [41]. Further data from 
our group demonstrated that adiponectin receptor type 1 blockade abolishes PV AT 
vasorelaxant effect on adjacent small arteries obtained from healthy biopsies [42], 
thus clearly demonstrating that adiponectin is an ADRF in man. Recently we have 
reviewed in detail the properties of this adipokine and its role as an ADRF [43].
Adiponectin directly stimulates the production of nitric oxide in endothelial cells 
using the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent pathways involving phosphory-
lation of eNOS at Ser1179 by AMPK. This vasodilator action of adiponectin may in 
part explain the effects of adiponectin in augmenting the metabolic actions of insu-
lin in vivo [44].
Serum levels of the adipocyte-derived proteins adiponectin and leptin correlate with 
insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) and BMI. Levels of expression of MCP-1 and TNF-
alpha in visceral adipose tissue are also higher in those with BMI ≥ 25. Inflammation 
plays a major role in diabetes, and a growing body of evidence is pointing to obesity-
induced PV AT damage as a precursor to the development of diabetes in obesity. In 
obesity, adipocytes outgrow their blood supply and exist in a state of chronic low-grade 
hypoxia. We have shown previously that there is increased staining for TNF-alpha 
receptor in obese compared with lean PV AT [42] and that following bariatric surgery, 
there is a significant reduction in staining for the TNF-alpha cytokine in the PV AT 
which correlates with a reduction in adipocyte size following weight loss [45]. It has 
been shown that TNF-alpha in visceral adipose tissue correlates with HOMA-IR [46] 
and those with type 2 diabetes have higher circulating levels of TNF-alpha [47].
Treatment with TNF-alpha leads to a reduction in adiponectin mRNA levels in 
3T3-L1 adipocytes, and this can be partially recovered by treatment with a c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitor or the PPAR-gamma agonist rosiglitazone [48].
Decreased total and HMW adiponectin and increased IL-6 and TNF-alpha levels 
are characteristic of patients with metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes [47, 49]. 
Adiponectin itself can reduce inflammation. The mRNA expression of TNF-alpha, 
IL-6 and ICAM-1 is elevated in db/db mice, and adiponectin treatment decreases 
these expressions in the aorta. Adiponectin may contribute to an increase in nitric 
oxide bioavailability by decreasing superoxide production as well as by inhibiting 
inflammation and adhesion molecules in the aorta in type 2 diabetic mice [50].
Nacci et al. have used streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic mice and investi-
gated whether treatment with the TNF-alpha blocking antibody infliximab can nor -
malise the expression of adiponectin and adiponectin receptors in different fat 
depots and if this effect correlates with improved endothelial activity and vasodila-
tor function. The STZ mice were studied at 1 and 2 weeks after diabetes onset and 
compared to age-matched infliximab-treated diabetic (I-STZ) and control animals 
(CTRL). In STZ mice, activation of pro-inflammatory JNK signalling was faster in 
PV AT than in visceral (V AT), epididymal (EAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) adipose 
depots and associated with reduced adiponectin synthesis and dysregulated 
AdipoR1/R2 levels. Compared with controls, activation of JNK in aortic endothelial 
cells and mesenteric arteries was associated with reduced expression/phosphoryla-
tion of eNOS and impaired ACh-mediated vasodilation. Infliximab treatment abro-
gated JNK activation, ameliorated adiponectin protein expression and normalised 
expression of both AdipoR1 and AdipoR2 in PV AT, concomitantly improving eNOS 
R. Aghamohammadzadeh and A. M. Heagerty277
expression and vessel relaxation in mesenteric arteries. These data highlight the 
early susceptibility of PV AT to activation of pro-inflammatory JNK signalling and 
its potential importance in early vascular changes of T1DM [51].
PV AT secretes a number of other adipokines with vasorelaxant properties in 
addition to adiponectin; these include angiotensin 1–7 (Ang 1–7), nitric oxide (NO), 
leptin, hydrogen sulphide and palmitic acid methyl ester (PAME).
Angiotensin 1–7 stimulates the release of endothelial NO, activating Ca-dependent 
potassium channels in arteries [37] and voltage-dependent potassium channels in 
veins [52]. In keeping with this, Angiotensin 1–7 receptor antagonists attenuate 
PV AT vasorelaxant function [53]. Ang 1–7 is also able to function via AT2 and Mas 
receptors to reduce the nerve-stimulated overflow of noradrenaline [54]. This may 
prove to be of paramount importance as sympathetic nerve over-activity contributes 
to pathophysiology of obesity-related hypertension, and we shall discuss this fur -
ther in this chapter. An oral preparation of Ang 1–7 has been produced [55], and 
assessment of its in  vivo effect on vessel tone may provide another therapeutic 
opportunity in treating obesity-related hypertension.
Healthy white adipose tissue [56] and PV AT [57] produce nitric oxide (NO). 
Insulin [58] and leptin [59] stimulate NO production in adipocytes, and it follows 
that the increased levels of insulin and leptin in obesity should enhance NO concen-
trations in PV AT. In early diet-induced obesity, there is enhanced NO bioavailability 
in mesenteric PV AT of rats [57], but factors such as elevated superoxide levels in 
chronic obesity lead to a diminution of NO bioavailability in obese PV AT [15].
Leptin is another molecule secreted from white adipocytes, and its plasma levels 
are elevated in obesity. Its central actions include its effects on the hypothalamus 
resulting in appetite suppression as well as an increase in the activity of the sympa-
thetic nervous system [60]. Leptin also has a direct endothelial NO-dependent vaso-
relaxant effect in health. Leptin-deficient ob/ob mice are severely obese, but remain 
normotensive [61]. Leptin stimulates endothelial NO release in the vasculature; thus 
an acute rise in leptin concentrations does not significantly affect blood pressure 
despite elevated SNS activity. In obesity, leptin levels are chronically elevated and 
confounded by endothelial dysfunction and a reduction in NO bioavailability [62]; 
therefore its vasopressor effects become more prominent.
Hydrogen sulphide functions via KCNQ [63], whilst palmitic acid methyl ester 
(PAME) functions via K v channels, independent of nitric oxide and endothelium 
[64], and its release is Ca-dependent. These two molecules have been more recent 
additions to the list of ADRFs. There is a reduction in the release of PAME from 
PV AT of 20-week-old SHR as compared with pre-hypertensive SHR and normoten-
sive Wistar-Kyoto rats. Exogenously applied PAME has a reduced vasorelaxant 
effect on de-endothelialised aortic rings of SHR as compared with its significant 
vasorelaxant effect on pre-constricted vessels from pre-hypertensive SHR and nor -
motensive rats [64]. Clearly PAME plays a role in pre-hypertension and is worthy 
of further clinical investigation in this context.
It has become apparent that there is more than one PV AT-derived molecule that 
satisfies the criteria for ADRF. We have shown that adiponectin is the ADRF from 
human subcutaneous PV AT [42], but other ADRFs may well play a significant role 
in human PV AT.20 The Role of Perivascular Fat in Raising Blood Pressure in Obesity and Diabetes278
20.5  PVAT as a Pro-contractile Tissue
In obesity, the vasorelaxant function of PV AT is attenuated or lost completely.
A number of explanations and theories exist as to the cause of this loss of func-
tion. Amongst the most likely are the effects of oxidative stress and inflammation, as 
well as adipokine dysregulation and increased sympathetic nervous system action.
We have shown previously that incubation of healthy PV AT with the inflamma-
tory cytokines TNF-alpha and IL-6 leads to a significant attenuation of PV AT vaso-
relaxant properties similar to that observed in obesity [42]. In keeping with the 
complexity of PV AT studies, we have reported that there is no homogenous effect 
from the presence of different white blood cells within the PV AT. In particular, we 
have studied both macrophages and eosinophils within PV AT. Macrophages secrete 
a number of inflammatory cytokines including TNF-α  and free radicals such as the 
superoxide anion. We used experimental hypoxia in tissue baths to approximate obe-
sity-induced PV AT damage and observed that macrophage recruitment and activa-
tion in adipose tissue is an essential step resulting in the loss of PV AT vasorelaxant 
function [65]. On the contrary, mice deficient of eosinophils lack the PV AT vasore-
laxant effect, and eosinophil reconstitution did lead to enhanced adiponectin and 
PV AT-derived NO bioavailability leading to the restoration of PV AT vasorelaxant 
function [66]. As previously mentioned, fat depots seem to have specific characteris-
tics, and the PV AT surrounding rat thoracic aorta expresses brown adipose tissue 
genes and appears to resist inflammation and macrophage infiltration in diet-induced 
obesity [67], so it is possible that in obesity, not all fat depots are affected equally.
The paramount role of macrophages in PV AT damage cannot be overstated; thus 
macrophage recruitment into PV AT tissue has been studied in some detail. Monocyte 
chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) levels are increased in adipose tissue and in plasma of 
genetically obese and diet-induced obese mice [68], as well in obese humans [69]. 
Moreover, insulin increases the secretion of MCP-1 from insulin-resistant 3T3-L1 
adipocytes and in ob/ob mice [70]; in this way the hyperinsulinaemic state in obesity 
leads to PV AT macrophage recruitment and subsequent release of cytokines which 
attenuate its vasorelaxant function. Fractalkine or CX3CL1 is a protein secreted from 
adipocytes that promotes monocyte adhesion to human adipocytes [71]. Fractalkine 
levels are increased in diabetes as well as in obesity [72]. There is also direct evidence 
for involvement of fractalkine in hypertension. The expression of CX3CL1 receptor 
gene in blood leukocytes from patients with arterial hypertension has been shown to 
be significantly increased [73]. This protein may well play a significant facilitator role 
in the process of initiation of the macrophage-induced loss of PV AT vasorelaxant 
function and is worthy of further consideration from a therapeutic target viewpoint.
Chemerin is another adipokine that plays a potentially significant role in the loss 
of PV AT vasorelaxant function by behaving as a possible link between obesity, BMI 
[74], PV AT, diabetes [75] and hypertension both in adults and children [76, 77].
Adipose tissue explants from obese patients exhibit significantly higher chemerin 
secretion compared with lean controls, and higher chemerin release is associated 
with insulin resistance and insulin-induced antilipolysis. Chemerin stimulates vas-
cular smooth muscle cell proliferation and migration via a ROS-dependent 
R. Aghamohammadzadeh and A. M. Heagerty279
signalling pathway, and at least in theory, this vascular remodelling can contribute 
to raising blood pressure [78]. Moreover, chemerin evokes direct vasoconstriction, 
as well as enhancing agonist-induced contractions in human and rat vessels through 
Gi proteins, resulting in the activation of L-type Ca2+ channels, as well as Src, and 
Rho kinase [79]. Levels of chemerin correlate well with clinical parameters too. Its 
plasma concentration is raised in obesity, insulin resistance and inflammatory con-
ditions, and levels positively correlate with increases in BMI and abdominal vis-
ceral fat accumulation [80]. It has been linked with increasing BP in mice, and 
importantly, its levels fall with loss of adipocyte mass following exercise or bariatric 
surgery [81].
We have discussed chemerin’s role in the vasculature, but it also plays a role in 
disrupting glucose homeostasis. Chemerin induces insulin resistance in human skel-
etal muscle cells at the level of insulin receptor substrate 1, Akt and glycogen syn-
thase kinase 3 phosphorylation and glucose uptake, and ERK inhibition prevents 
chemerin-induced insulin resistance [74]. Following weight loss, the significant 
decrease in chemerin levels in 3 months after bariatric surgery is associated with a 
decrease in HOMA-IR and blood glucose [82].
From an inflammatory perspective, chemerin induces ICAM-1 and E-selectin 
expression in endothelial cells [83]. Given that it plays a role in monocytes recruit-
ment, insulin resistance and vasoconstriction and its levels correlate with weight 
gain and drop following weight loss, chemerin is one of the major adipokines that 
could be targeted in therapeutic strategies to treat MetS.
No doubt further PV AT-derived pro-contractile entities will be described much 
the same way as there is now a list of candidates for PV AT-derived vasorelaxant 
factors.
20.6  The RAAS Within PVAT
In obesity, there are raised circulating levels of the components of the renin-angio-
tensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). Adipocytes have an intrinsic RAAS system 
including ACE and angiotensin type 1 and type 2 receptors, and they secrete angio-
tensinogen, the levels of which are raised in obesity [84]. The source of the adipo-
cyte renin activity remains controversial and unclear [85].The raised circulating 
aldosterone levels in obesity correlate with the degree of visceral  adiposity and 
waist-to-hip ratio [86– 88]. In the context of obesity-related hypertension, the 
raised aldosterone concentrations have a twofold effect: they contribute to increased 
blood volume by increasing sodium reabsorption and lead to the generation of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Aldosterone activates NADPH oxidase, thus 
increasing ROS levels leading to oxidative posttranslational changes to guanylyl 
cyclase rendering it NO-insensitive [89]. ROS can also reduce NO bioavailability 
by forming molecules such as peroxynitrite, thus contributing to endothelial dys-
function. ROS can also stimulate the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) [90], thereby 
theoretically contributing to further elevations in ROS levels, forming a vicious 
circle. At the endothelial level, aldosterone decreases glucose-6-phosphate 20 The Role of Perivascular Fat in Raising Blood Pressure in Obesity and Diabetes280
dehydrogenase (G6PD) activity. G6PD is a cytosolic enzyme and the main source 
of intracellular NADPH which functions to limit ROS activity [91]. There are two 
aldosterone receptor antagonists in clinical use: spironolactone is a nonselective 
aldosterone receptor antagonist, whereas eplerenone is a selective aldosterone 
receptor antagonist which has a lower degree of cross-reactivity with sex-steroid 
hormones and a longer half-life than spironolactone [92]. Spironolactone increases 
the expression of G6PD and its activity, as well as raising NADPH levels leading 
to a reduction in ROS generation in aortas of aldosterone-treated mice [91]. 
Aldosterone increases the expression of TNF-α  from macrophages within PV AT, 
and we have reviewed the role of macrophages and TNF-alpha in PV AT damage. 
Eplerenone leads to a reduction of ROS generation and increased levels of adipo-
nectin in obese and diabetic mice [93].
It is not clear to what extent the blood pressure reduction is a result of blood 
volume and cardiac output reduction secondary to reduced sodium reabsorption, or 
due to a reduction in sympathetic activity through the direct CNS effect of aldoste-
rone [94, 95]. Certainly, a reduction in ROS generation within PV AT would partly 
restore the favourable vasorelaxant profile lost, in part, following hypoxia-induced 
inflammatory damage in obesity.
The ROS-induced PV AT damage in obesity would suggest that antioxidants 
and free radical scavengers could be therapeutic agents to reverse this damage 
and possibly lower blood pressure in obesity. We’ve shown in ex vivo experi-
ments that SOD and catalase can restore the PV AT vasorelaxant property in both 
human and murine models of obesity [15, 45]. A 3-week administration of des-
methyltirilazad (lazaroid), a potent antioxidant, significantly ameliorates blood 
pressure in SHR rats [96].
We have shown also that MR blockade using eplerenone is able to reduce mac-
rophage activation and rescue aldosterone-induced and hypoxia-induced PV AT 
damage [65]. Intuitively, it has been proposed that prevention of ROS generation 
using NADPH oxidase inhibitors may be a better way of tackling oxidative stress 
than scavenging the free radicals once they have been generated, although clinical 
studies need to assess the feasibility of this theory [97].
Vessel stiffness is another important contributing factor in the pathophysiology 
of obesity-related hypertension. The association of vessel stiffness is strongest for 
waist circumference and visceral adiposity, rather than global obesity as measured 
by BMI [98]. Obesity is a complex multifaceted disorder, and dysregulation of any 
number of factors can affect vascular stiffness. The adipokine leptin has been linked 
with impairment of arterial distensibility, and its raised levels in obesity may well 
be a contributing factor in arterial stiffness [99].
Inflammation, oxidative stress and monocyte recruitment all play their part in 
initiating endothelial dysfunction in obesity. There is also disruption to the fine 
balance between the vasoconstrictor action of endothelin-1 and the vasodilator 
effect of NO in endothelial cells. In health, insulin activates phosphoinositide 
3-kinase leading to increased NO production secondary to eNOS phosphorylation 
[100]. Postprandial physiological surge in insulin concentrations leads to dilatation 
of precapillary arterioles, thus improving blood flow and delivery of nutrients to 
R. Aghamohammadzadeh and A. M. Heagerty281
tissues, a process known as nutritive flow [33]. In obesity, NO-mediated vasorelax-
ation is impaired, leading to vasoconstriction via unopposed endothelin-1 action 
[33, 100]. Reduced endothelial nitric oxide bioavailability in obesity is a signifi-
cant consequence of the reactions between free radicals and NO. Reactive oxygen 
species such as the superoxide anion react with nitric oxide to produce peroxyni-
trite and deplete endothelial NO levels. The role of nitric oxide in vessel tone 
modulation and its fate in inflammatory diseases have been extensively reviewed 
by Jin and Loscalzo [101]. We now know that PV AT is a source of NO which con-
tributes to the PV AT vasorelaxant function, but in obesity, the generation of ROS 
depletes this vital source of NO; the microvessel is faced with reduced NO bio-
availability from both outside the vessel, the PV AT, and inside, the endothelium.
There is a close correlation between obesity, obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) and 
hypertension. There is a dose-response relationship between sleep-disordered 
breathing and hypertension, independent of confounding factors [102]. Almost half 
of all hypertensive patients suffer from sleep apnoea, and half of all sleep apnoea 
patients are hypertensive [86]. Whilst fat deposition around the upper airway in 
obesity is thought to be the most significant contributor to the development of OSA 
in obesity, there are a number of potential mechanisms linking OSA with hyperten-
sion, including endothelial dysfunction, CNS stimulation, oxidative stress and 
inflammation [103]. The most significant factor is thought to be the elevated oxida-
tive stress levels initiated by intermittent hypoxia, coupled with hyperleptinaemia 
[104] with its direct stimulatory effects on the sympathetic nervous system. The 
elevated levels of aldosterone in OSA also correlate with severity of OSA. Once 
again, this highlights the significance of ROS and aldosterone generation, both of 
which are generated by hypoxic and inflamed adipocytes.
20.7  Sympathetic Nerves Within PVAT
PV AT is innervated by nerves from the sympathetic nervous system. Obesity has a 
differential effect on local SNS activity. Hypertensive obese individuals show an 
increased sympathetic activity in both cardiac and renal nerves [105].There is also 
evidence of central stimulation of the SNS by reactive oxygen species, the levels of 
which are raised in obesity. Animal studies suggest that NADPH oxidase-dependent 
oxidative stress in the brain may be a cause of increased sympathetic tone leading to 
hypertension in high-fat fed animals [106].
The heightened sympathetic state in obesity and presence of nerve endings 
within PV AT have led to further evaluation of the effects of SNS on PV AT using 
electric field stimulation (EFS) protocols. Work by Gao et al. has shown that super -
oxide generated by NADPH oxidase in response to electric field stimulation 
enhances the contractile response of adjacent small arteries [107]. It has been shown 
that candesartan (angiotensin II type 1 receptor antagonist) reduces this PV AT-
mediated potentiation of EFS-induced contractile response, thus providing another 
potential explanation for the increased vascular resistance in obesity where there are 
both increased sympathetic nerve activity and increased angiotensin II levels [108].20 The Role of Perivascular Fat in Raising Blood Pressure in Obesity and Diabetes282
Circulating adiponectin levels also increase by nearly 70% post gastric bypass and 
by around 36% post gastric banding procedures. The greatest increase is after the loss 
of 35% of the original body weight, with a strong correlation between percentage 
increase in adiponectin levels and percentage decrease in BMI [109]. This is not true 
of weight loss by other surgical means. After liposuction, despite a 10% weight reduc-
tion, no improvements in adiponectin or insulin resistance have been noted [110]. This 
is likely due to the differing qualities of adipose tissue depots with visceral fat exhibit-
ing a more inflammatory profile as compared with subcutaneous adipose tissue [111].
Weight loss or bariatric surgery remains the most reliable means to achieve and 
maintain significant weight loss. Bariatric surgery has also been shown to improve 
the inflammatory profile of obese individuals [112]. In subcutaneous adipose tissue, 
the expression of IL-6 and TNF-α  mRNA decreases significantly, and expression of 
adiponectin and its receptors increases after dramatic weight loss post surgery [113]. 
The significant degree of weight loss, together with improvements in adipokine and 
inflammatory cytokine profile, as well as resolution or improvement in diabetes sta-
tus [114] makes this an invaluable procedure in those suffering from morbid obesity 
and its sequelae. We have reported that 6 months following significant weight loss 
post bariatric surgery, PV AT regains its vasorelaxant function, despite the individuals 
still weighing in the obese category. This shows that there is more to weight loss than 
purely loss of mass, and other factors such as the reduced adipocyte size and a reduc-
tion in PV AT inflammation as a consequence of a more balanced oxygen supply may 
be the fundamental trigger leading to our observation [45].
Vitamin D is a perfect example to highlight the need for tissue-specific or tissue-
targeted therapies, given that it can suppress renin transcription, and transgenic ani-
mals devoid of vitamin D receptor develop hypertension, but they remain lean with 
smaller adipocytes on a high-fat diet. Overexpression of the receptors on adipocytes 
leads to a suppression of lipolysis, thermogenesis and resultant obesity [115, 116]. 
This is a perfect example of the challenges facing researchers trying to identify a 
molecule that can treat one condition without causing detrimental off-target effects. 
The (re)search continues.
 Conclusion
Perivascular adipose tissue plays a crucial role in modulating vessel tone and 
blood glucose homeostasis. In obesity, PV AT is damaged and dysfunctional. 
Rescuing the damaged PV AT and restoring the healthy PV AT phenotype before 
the onset of hypertension and diabetes should be the focus of future studies.
Acknowledgments  Sources of Funding: Dr. Aghamohammadzadeh is an NIHR Academic 
Clinical Lecturer in Cardiology at the University of Manchester.
References
 1. WHO. Obesity and overweight (Factsheet 311). 2016 [updated 2016; cited 04 July 2017]. 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/index.html.
R. Aghamohammadzadeh and A. M. Heagerty283
 2. The NHS Information Centre LS. Statistics on Obesity, Physical Activity and Diet: England, 
2011. 24 Feb 2011.
 3. CDC. U.S. Obesity Trends. 2011 [updated 2011; cited 2011 18 Aug 2011]. http://www.cdc.
gov/obesity/data/trends.html#State.
 4. Neel JV . Diabetes mellitus: a “thrifty” genotype rendered detrimental by “progress”? Am J 
Hum Genet. 1962;14:353–62.
 5. Diamond J. The double puzzle of diabetes. Nature. 2003;423(6940):599–602.
 6. Scott EM, Grant PJ.  Neel revisited: the adipocyte, seasonality and type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetologia. 2006;49(7):1462–6.
 7. Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration, Wormser D, Kaptoge S, Di Angelantonio E, Wood 
AM, Pennells L, et al. Separate and combined associations of body-mass index and abdomi-
nal adiposity with cardiovascular disease: collaborative analysis of 58 prospective studies. 
Lancet. 2011;377(9771):1085–95.
 8. Cornier MA, Despres JP, Davis N, Grossniklaus DA, Klein S, Lamarche B, et al. Assessing 
adiposity: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2011;124:1996–2019.
 9. CDC.  Hypertension. 2011 [updated 2011; cited 2011 18 Aug 2011]. http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/fastats/hyprtens.htm.
 10. WHO. Blood pressure. 2017 [updated 2017; cited 2017 04 July 2017]. http://apps.who.int/
gho/data/view.main.2464GLOBALSTANDARD?lang=en.
 11. Henry SL, Barzel B, Wood-Bradley RJ, Burke SL, Head GA, Armitage JA. The developmen-
tal origins of obesity-related hypertension. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2012;39:799–806.
 12. Kotchen TA.  Obesity-related hypertension: epidemiology, pathophysiology, and clinical 
management. Am J Hypertens. 2010;23(11):1170–8.
 13. Gosmanov AR, Smiley DD, Robalino G, Siquiera J, Khan B, Le NA, et al. Effects of oral and 
intravenous fat load on blood pressure, endothelial function, sympathetic activity, and oxida-
tive stress in obese healthy subjects. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2010;299(6):E953–8.
 14. Dobrian AD, Schriver SD, Lynch T, Prewitt RL. Effect of salt on hypertension and oxidative 
stress in a rat model of diet-induced obesity. Am J Physiol Ren Physiol. 2003;285(4):F619–28.
 15. Aghamohammadzadeh R, Unwin RD, Greenstein AS, Heagerty AM. Effects of obesity on 
perivascular adipose tissue vasorelaxant function: nitric oxide, inflammation and elevated 
systemic blood pressure. J Vasc Res. 2015;52(5):299–305.
 16. Fox CS, Massaro JM, Hoffmann U, Pou KM, Maurovich-Horvat P, Liu CY , et al. Abdominal 
visceral and subcutaneous adipose tissue compartments: association with metabolic risk fac-
tors in the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 2007;116(1):39–48.
 17. Gesta S, Tseng YH, Kahn CR. Developmental origin of fat: tracking obesity to its source. 
Cell. 2007;131(2):242–56.
 18. Manolopoulos KN, Karpe F, Frayn KN. Gluteofemoral body fat as a determinant of meta-
bolic health. Int J Obes. 2010;34(6):949–59.
 19. Chatterjee TK, Stoll LL, Denning GM, Harrelson A, Blomkalns AL, Idelman G, et  al. 
Proinflammatory phenotype of perivascular adipocytes: influence of high-fat feeding. Circ 
Res. 2009;104(4):541–9.
 20. Dorresteijn JA, Visseren FL, Spiering W. Mechanisms linking obesity to hypertension. Obes 
Rev. 2011;13:17–26.
 21. Lee CM, Huxley RR, Wildman RP, Woodward M. Indices of abdominal obesity are better 
discriminators of cardiovascular risk factors than BMI: a meta-analysis. J Clin Epidemiol. 
2008;61(7):646–53.
 22. Iacobellis G, Assael F, Ribaudo MC, Zappaterreno A, Alessi G, Di Mario U, et al. Epicardial 
fat from echocardiography: a new method for visceral adipose tissue prediction. Obes Res. 
2003;11(2):304–10.
 23. Iacobellis G, Ribaudo MC, Assael F, Vecci E, Tiberti C, Zappaterreno A, et  al. 
Echocardiographic epicardial adipose tissue is related to anthropometric and clinical param-
eters of metabolic syndrome: a new indicator of cardiovascular risk. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2003;88(11):5163–8.20 The Role of Perivascular Fat in Raising Blood Pressure in Obesity and Diabetes284
 24. Iacobellis G, Willens HJ, Barbaro G, Sharma AM. Threshold values of high-risk echocardio-
graphic epicardial fat thickness. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2008;16(4):887–92.
 25. Simons PJ, van den Pangaart PS, Aerts JM, Boon L. Pro-inflammatory delipidizing cytokines 
reduce adiponectin secretion from human adipocytes without affecting adiponectin oligomer -
ization. J Endocrinol. 2007;192(2):289–99.
 26. Baker AR, Silva NF, Quinn DW, Harte AL, Pagano D, Bonser RS, et al. Human epicardial 
adipose tissue expresses a pathogenic profile of adipocytokines in patients with cardiovascu-
lar disease. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2006;5:1.
 27. Eiras S, Teijeira-Fernandez E, Shamagian LG, Fernandez AL, Vazquez-Boquete A, 
Gonzalez-Juanatey JR.  Extension of coronary artery disease is associated with increased 
IL-6 and decreased adiponectin gene expression in epicardial adipose tissue. Cytokine. 
2008;43(2):174–80.
 28. Iacobellis G, Pistilli D, Gucciardo M, Leonetti F, Miraldi F, Brancaccio G, et al. Adiponectin 
expression in human epicardial adipose tissue in vivo is lower in patients with coronary artery 
disease. Cytokine. 2005;29(6):251–5.
 29. Iacobellis G, di Gioia CR, Cotesta D, Petramala L, Travaglini C, De Santis V , et al. Epicardial 
adipose tissue adiponectin expression is related to intracoronary adiponectin levels. Horm 
Metab Res. 2009;41(3):227–31.
 30. Teijeira-Fernandez E, Eiras S, Grigorian-Shamagian L, Fernandez A, Adrio B, Gonzalez-
Juanatey JR. Epicardial adipose tissue expression of adiponectin is lower in patients with 
hypertension. J Hum Hypertens. 2008;22(12):856–63.
 31. Ohashi K, Kihara S, Ouchi N, Kumada M, Fujita K, Hiuge A, et al. Adiponectin replenish-
ment ameliorates obesity-related hypertension. Hypertension. 2006;47(6):1108–16.
 32. Pischon T, Girman CJ, Hotamisligil GS, Rifai N, Hu FB, Rimm EB. Plasma adiponectin 
levels and risk of myocardial infarction in men. JAMA. 2004;291(14):1730–7.
 33. Yudkin JS, Eringa E, Stehouwer CD. “Vasocrine” signalling from perivascular fat: a mecha-
nism linking insulin resistance to vascular disease. Lancet. 2005;365(9473):1817–20.
 34. Soltis EE, Cassis LA. Influence of perivascular adipose tissue on rat aortic smooth muscle 
responsiveness. Clin Exp Hypertens A. 1991;13(2):277–96.
 35. Gao YJ, Lu C, Su LY , Sharma AM, Lee RM.  Modulation of vascular function by peri-
vascular adipose tissue: the role of endothelium and hydrogen peroxide. Br J Pharmacol. 
2007;151(3):323–31.
 36. Galvez-Prieto B, Bolbrinker J, Stucchi P, de Las Heras AI, Merino B, Arribas S, et  al. 
Comparative expression analysis of the renin-angiotensin system components between white 
and brown perivascular adipose tissue. J Endocrinol. 2008;197(1):55–64.
 37. Lu C, Su LY , Lee RM, Gao YJ. Alterations in perivascular adipose tissue structure and func-
tion in hypertension. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011;656(1-3):68–73.
 38. Dubrovska G, Verlohren S, Luft FC, Gollasch M. Mechanisms of ADRF release from rat 
aortic adventitial adipose tissue. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2004;286(3):H1107–13.
 39. Deng G, Long Y , Yu YR, Li MR. Adiponectin directly improves endothelial dysfunction in 
obese rats through the AMPK-eNOS Pathway. Int J Obes. 2010;34(1):165–71.
 40. Yilmaz MI, Sonmez A, Caglar K, Celik T, Yenicesu M, Eyileten T, et al. Effect of antihy-
pertensive agents on plasma adiponectin levels in hypertensive patients with metabolic syn-
drome. Nephrology (Carlton). 2007;12(2):147–53.
 41. Fesus G, Dubrovska G, Gorzelniak K, Kluge R, Huang Y , Luft FC, et al. Adiponectin is a 
novel humoral vasodilator. Cardiovasc Res. 2007;75(4):719–27.
 42. Greenstein AS, Khavandi K, Withers SB, Sonoyama K, Clancy O, Jeziorska M, et al. Local 
inflammation and hypoxia abolish the protective anticontractile properties of perivascular fat 
in obese patients. Circulation. 2009;119(12):1661–70.
 43. Aghamohammadzadeh R, Withers SB, Lynch FM, Greenstein AS, Malik R, Heagerty 
AM. Perivascular adipose tissue from human systemic and coronary vessels: the emergence 
of a new pharmacotherapeutic target. Br J Pharmacol. 2012;165:670–82.
 44. Chen H, Montagnani M, Funahashi T, Shimomura I, Quon MJ. Adiponectin stimulates pro-
duction of nitric oxide in vascular endothelial cells. J Biol Chem. 2003;278(45):45021–6.
R. Aghamohammadzadeh and A. M. Heagerty285
 45. Aghamohammadzadeh R, Greenstein AS, Yadav R, Jeziorska M, Hama S, Soltani F, et al. 
The effects of bariatric surgery on human small artery function: evidence for reduction in 
perivascular adipocyte inflammation, and the restoration of normal anticontractile activity 
despite persistent obesity. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:128–35.
 46. Kang YE, Kim JM, Joung KH, Lee JH, You BR, Choi MJ, et al. The roles of adipokines, pro-
inflammatory cytokines, and adipose tissue macrophages in obesity-associated insulin resis-
tance in modest obesity and early metabolic dysfunction. PLoS One. 2016;11(4):e0154003.
 47. Qiao YC, Shen J, He L, Hong XZ, Tian F, Pan YH, et al. Changes of regulatory T cells and of 
proinflammatory and immunosuppressive cytokines in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Diabetes Res. 2016;2016:3694957.
 48. Kim KY , Kim JK, Jeon JH, Yoon SR, Choi I, Yang Y . c-Jun N-terminal kinase is involved 
in the suppression of adiponectin expression by TNF-alpha in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun. 2005;327(2):460–7.
 49. Lee JM, Kim SR, Yoo SJ, Hong OK, Son HS, Chang SA. The relationship between adipo-
kines, metabolic parameters and insulin resistance in patients with metabolic syndrome and 
type 2 diabetes. J Int Med Res. 2009;37(6):1803–12.
 50. Lee S, Zhang H, Chen J, Dellsperger KC, Hill MA, Zhang C. Adiponectin abates diabetes-
induced endothelial dysfunction by suppressing oxidative stress, adhesion molecules, and 
inflammation in type 2 diabetic mice. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012;303(1):H106–15.
 51. Nacci C, Leo V , De Benedictis L, Potenza MA, Sgarra L, De Salvia MA, et al. Infliximab 
therapy restores adiponectin expression in perivascular adipose tissue and improves endo-
thelial nitric oxide-mediated vasodilation in mice with type 1 diabetes. Vasc Pharmacol. 
2016;87:83–91.
 52. Lu C, Zhao AX, Gao YJ, Lee RM. Modulation of vein function by perivascular adipose tis-
sue. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011;657(1-3):111–6.
 53. Lee RM, Bader M, Alenina N, Santos RA, Gao YJ, Lu C. Mas receptors in modulating relax-
ation induced by perivascular adipose tissue. Life Sci. 2011;89:467–72.
 54. Byku M, Macarthur H, Westfall TC.  Inhibitory effects of angiotensin (1-7) on the nerve 
stimulation-induced release of norepinephrine and neuropeptide y from the mesenteric arte-
rial bed. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2009;289:H457–65.
 55. Marques FD, Ferreira AJ, Sinisterra RD, Jacoby BA, Sousa FB, Caliari MV , et al. An oral 
formulation of angiotensin-(1-7) produces cardioprotective effects in infarcted and isoproter -
enol-treated rats. Hypertension. 2011;57(3):477–83.
 56. Ribiere C, Jaubert AM, Gaudiot N, Sabourault D, Marcus ML, Boucher JL, et  al. White 
adipose tissue nitric oxide synthase: a potential source for NO production. Biochem Biophys 
Res Commun. 1996;222(3):706–12.
 57. Gil-Ortega M, Stucchi P, Guzman-Ruiz R, Cano V , Arribas S, Gonzalez MC, et al. Adaptative 
nitric oxide overproduction in perivascular adipose tissue during early diet-induced obesity. 
Endocrinology. 2010;151:3299–306.
 58. Ribiere C, Jaubert AM, Sabourault D, Lacasa D, Giudicelli Y . Insulin stimulates nitric oxide 
production in rat adipocytes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002;291(2):394–9.
 59. Mehebik N, Jaubert AM, Sabourault D, Giudicelli Y , Ribiere C. Leptin-induced nitric oxide 
production in white adipocytes is mediated through PKA and MAP kinase activation. Am J 
Phys Cell Physiol. 2005;289(2):C379–87.
 60. Rahmouni K, Correia ML, Haynes WG, Mark AL.  Obesity-associated hypertension: new 
insights into mechanisms. Hypertension. 2005;45(1):9–14.
 61. Mark AL, Shaffer RA, Correia ML, Morgan DA, Sigmund CD, Haynes WG. Contrasting 
blood pressure effects of obesity in leptin-deficient ob/ob mice and agouti yellow obese mice. 
J Hypertens. 1999;17(12 Pt 2):1949–53.
 62. da Silva AA, do Carmo J, Dubinion J, Hall JE. The role of the sympathetic nervous system in 
obesity-related hypertension. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2009;11(3):206–11.
 63. Schleifenbaum J, Kohn C, V oblova N, Dubrovska G, Zavarirskaya O, Gloe T, et al. Systemic 
peripheral artery relaxation by KCNQ channel openers and hydrogen sulfide. J Hypertens. 
2010;28(9):1875–82.20 The Role of Perivascular Fat in Raising Blood Pressure in Obesity and Diabetes286
 64. Lee YC, Chang HH, Chiang CL, Liu CH, Yeh JI, Chen MF, et al. Role of perivascular adipose 
tissue-derived methyl palmitate in vascular tone regulation and pathogenesis of hypertension. 
Circulation. 2011;124:1160–71.
 65. Withers BS, Agabiti-Rosei C, Linvingstone DM, Little MC, Aslam R, Malik RA, et  al. 
Macrophage activation is responsible for loss of anticontractile function in inflamed perivas-
cular fat. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011;31:908–13.
 66. Withers SB, Forman R, Meza-Perez S, Sorobetea D, Sitnik K, Hopwood T, et al. Eosinophils 
are key regulators of perivascular adipose tissue and vascular functionality. Sci Rep. 2017 
Mar 17;7:44571.
 67. Fitzgibbons TP, Kogan S, Aouadi M, Hendricks GM, Straubhaar J, Czech MP. Similarity of 
mouse perivascular and brown adipose tissues and their resistance to diet-induced inflamma-
tion. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011;301(4):H1425–37.
 68. Kanda H, Tateya S, Tamori Y , Kotani K, Hiasa K, Kitazawa R, et al. MCP-1 contributes to 
macrophage infiltration into adipose tissue, insulin resistance, and hepatic steatosis in obe-
sity. J Clin Invest. 2006;116(6):1494–505.
 69. Kim CS, Park HS, Kawada T, Kim JH, Lim D, Hubbard NE, et  al. Circulating levels of 
MCP-1 and IL-8 are elevated in human obese subjects and associated with obesity-related 
parameters. Int J Obes. 2006;30(9):1347–55.
 70. Sartipy P, Loskutoff DJ. Monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 in obesity and insulin resis-
tance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;100(12):7265–70.
 71. Shah R, Hinkle CC, Ferguson JF, Mehta NN, Li M, Qu L, et al. Fractalkine is a novel human 
adipochemokine associated with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes. 2011;60(5):1512–8.
 72. Sirois-Gagnon D, Chamberland A, Perron S, Brisson D, Gaudet D, Laprise C. Association of 
common polymorphisms in the fractalkine receptor (CX3CR1) with obesity. Obesity (Silver 
Spring). 2010;19(1):222–7.
 73. Timofeeva A V , Goryunova LE, Khaspekov GL, Kovalevskii DA, Scamrov A V , Bulkina OS, 
et al. Altered gene expression pattern in peripheral blood leukocytes from patients with arte-
rial hypertension. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006;1091:319–35.
 74. Sell H, Laurencikiene J, Taube A, Eckardt K, Cramer A, Horrighs A, et al. Chemerin is a 
novel adipocyte-derived factor inducing insulin resistance in primary human skeletal muscle 
cells. Diabetes. 2009;58(12):2731–40.
 75. Ouwens DM, Bekaert M, Lapauw B, Van Nieuwenhove Y , Lehr S, Hartwig S, et al. Chemerin 
as biomarker for insulin sensitivity in males without typical characteristics of metabolic syn-
drome. Arch Physiol Biochem. 2012;118(3):135–8.
 76. Schipper HS, Nuboer R, Prop S, van den Ham HJ, de Boer FK, Kesmir C, et al. Systemic 
inflammation in childhood obesity: circulating inflammatory mediators and activated 
CD14++ monocytes. Diabetologia. 2012;55(10):2800–10.
 77. Verrijn Stuart AA, Schipper HS, Tasdelen I, Egan DA, Prakken BJ, Kalkhoven E, et  al. 
Altered plasma adipokine levels and in  vitro adipocyte differentiation in pediatric type 1 
diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;97(2):463–72.
 78. Kunimoto H, Kazama K, Takai M, Oda M, Okada M, Yamawaki H. Chemerin promotes the 
proliferation and migration of vascular smooth muscle and increases mouse blood pressure. 
Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2015;309(5):H1017–28.
 79. Ferland DJ, Darios ES, Neubig RR, Sjogren B, Truong N, Torres R, et al. Chemerin-induced 
arterial contraction is Gi- and calcium-dependent. Vasc Pharmacol. 2017;88:30–41.
 80. Shin H-Y , Lee DC, Chu SH, Jeon JY , Lee MK, Im JA, et al. Chemerin levels are positively 
correlated with abdominal visceral fat accumulation. Clin Endocrinol. 2012;77(1):47–50.
 81. Chakaroun R, Raschpichler M, Kloting N, Oberbach A, Flehmig G, Kern M, et al. Effects of 
weight loss and exercise on chemerin serum concentrations and adipose tissue expression in 
human obesity. Metabolism. 2011;61(5):706–14.
 82. Sell H, Divoux A, Poitou C, Basdevant A, Bouillot JL, Bedossa P, et al. Chemerin correlates 
with markers for fatty liver in morbidly obese patients and strongly decreases after weight 
loss induced by bariatric surgery. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95(6):2892–6.
R. Aghamohammadzadeh and A. M. Heagerty287
 83. Landgraf K, Friebe D, Ullrich T, Kratzsch J, Dittrich K, Herberth G, et al. Chemerin as a 
mediator between obesity and vascular inflammation in children. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2012;97(4):E556–64.
 84. Van Harmelen V , Ariapart P, Hoffstedt J, Lundkvist I, Bringman S, Arner P. Increased adipose 
angiotensinogen gene expression in human obesity. Obesity. 2000;8(4):337–41.
 85. Engeli S, Negrel R, Sharma AM. Physiology and pathophysiology of the adipose tissue renin-
angiotensin system. Hypertension. 2000;35(6):1270–7.
 86. Goodfriend TL, Calhoun DA. Resistant hypertension, obesity, sleep apnea, and aldosterone: 
theory and therapy. Hypertension. 2004;43(3):518–24.
 87. Goodfriend TL, Egan BM, Kelley DE.  Aldosterone in obesity. Endocr Res. 
1998;24(3-4):789–96.
 88. Goodfriend TL, Kelley DE, Goodpaster BH, Winters SJ. Visceral obesity and insulin resis-
tance are associated with plasma aldosterone levels in women. Obes Res. 1999;7(4):355–62.
 89. Maron BA, Zhang YY , Handy DE, Beuve A, Tang SS, Loscalzo J, et al. Aldosterone increases 
oxidant stress to impair guanylyl cyclase activity by cysteinyl thiol oxidation in vascular 
smooth muscle cells. J Biol Chem. 2009;284(12):7665–72.
 90. Wang H, Shimosawa T, Matsui H, Kaneko T, Ogura S, Uetake Y , et al. Paradoxical mineralo-
corticoid receptor activation and left ventricular diastolic dysfunction under high oxidative 
stress conditions. J Hypertens. 2008;26(7):1453–62.
 91. Leopold JA, Dam A, Maron BA, Scribner AW, Liao R, Handy DE, et al. Aldosterone impairs 
vascular reactivity by decreasing glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity. Nat Med. 
2007;13(2):189–97.
 92. Maron BA, Leopold JA.  Aldosterone receptor antagonists: effective but often forgotten. 
Circulation. 2010;121(7):934–9.
 93. Guo C, Ricchiuti V , Lian BQ, Yao TM, Coutinho P, Romero JR, et  al. Mineralocorticoid 
receptor blockade reverses obesity-related changes in expression of adiponectin, peroxi-
some proliferator-activated receptor-gamma, and proinflammatory adipokines. Circulation. 
2008;117(17):2253–61.
 94. de Paula RB, da Silva AA, Hall JE.  Aldosterone antagonism attenuates obesity-induced 
hypertension and glomerular hyperfiltration. Hypertension. 2004;43(1):41–7.
 95. Rahmouni K, Barthelmebs M, Grima M, Imbs JL, De Jong W. Involvement of brain min-
eralocorticoid receptor in salt-enhanced hypertension in spontaneously hypertensive rats. 
Hypertension. 2001;38(4):902–6.
 96. Vaziri ND, Ni Z, Oveisi F, Trnavsky-Hobbs DL. Effect of antioxidant therapy on blood pres-
sure and NO synthase expression in hypertensive rats. Hypertension. 2000;36(6):957–64.
 97. Drummond GR, Selemidis S, Griendling KK, Sobey CG.  Combating oxidative stress 
in vascular disease: NADPH oxidases as therapeutic targets. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 
2011;10(6):453–71.
 98. Safar ME, Czernichow S, Blacher J. Obesity, arterial stiffness, and cardiovascular risk. J Am 
Soc Nephrol. 2006;17(4 Suppl 2):S109–11.
 99. Singhal A, Farooqi IS, Cole TJ, O’Rahilly S, Fewtrell M, Kattenhorn M, et al. Influence of 
leptin on arterial distensibility: a novel link between obesity and cardiovascular disease? 
Circulation. 2002;106(15):1919–24.
 100. Kotsis V , Stabouli S, Papakatsika S, Rizos Z, Parati G.  Mechanisms of obesity-induced 
hypertension. Hypertens Res. 2010;33(5):386–93.
 101. Jin RC, Loscalzo J.  Vascular nitric oxide: formation and function. J Blood Med. 
2010;2010(1):147–62.
 102. Peppard PE, Young T, Palta M, Skatrud J. Prospective study of the association between sleep-
disordered breathing and hypertension. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(19):1378–84.
 103. Wolk R, Shamsuzzaman AS, Somers VK.  Obesity, sleep apnea, and hypertension. 
Hypertension. 2003;42(6):1067–74.
 104. Yang R, Sikka G, Larson J, Watts VL, Niu X, Ellis CL, et  al. Restoring leptin signaling 
reduces hyperlipidemia and improves vascular stiffness induced by chronic intermittent 
hypoxia. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011;300(4):H1467–76.20 The Role of Perivascular Fat in Raising Blood Pressure in Obesity and Diabetes288
 105. Rumantir MS, Vaz M, Jennings GL, Collier G, Kaye DM, Seals DR, et al. Neural mecha-
nisms in human obesity-related hypertension. J Hypertens. 1999;17(8):1125–33.
 106. Nagae A, Fujita M, Kawarazaki H, Matsui H, Ando K, Fujita T. Sympathoexcitation by oxi-
dative stress in the brain mediates arterial pressure elevation in obesity-induced hypertension. 
Circulation. 2009;119(7):978–86.
 107. Gao YJ, Takemori K, Su LY , An WS, Lu C, Sharma AM, et  al. Perivascular adipose 
tissue promotes vasoconstriction: the role of superoxide anion. Cardiovasc Res. 
2006;71(2):363–73.
 108. Lu C, Su LY , Lee RM, Gao YJ. Mechanisms for perivascular adipose tissue-mediated poten-
tiation of vascular contraction to perivascular neuronal stimulation: the role of adipocyte-
derived angiotensin II. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011;634(1-3):107–12.
 109. Butner KL, Nickols-Richardson SM, Clark SF, Ramp WK, Herbert WG. A review of weight 
loss following Roux-en-Y gastric bypass vs restrictive bariatric surgery: impact on adiponec-
tin and insulin. Obes Surg. 2010;20(5):559–68.
 110. Compher C, Badellino KO. Obesity and inflammation: lessons from bariatric surgery. JPEN 
J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2008;32(6):645–7.
 111. Ibrahim MM. Subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue: structural and functional differences. 
Obes Rev. 2009;11(1):11–8.
 112. Forsythe LK, Wallace JM, Livingstone MB. Obesity and inflammation: the effects of weight 
loss. Nutr Res Rev. 2008;21(2):117–33.
 113. Moschen AR, Molnar C, Geiger S, Graziadei I, Ebenbichler CF, Weiss H, et  al. Anti-
inflammatory effects of excessive weight loss: potent suppression of adipose interleukin 6 
and tumour necrosis factor {alpha} expression. Gut. 2010;59:1259–64.
 114. Blackburn GL, Wollner SB, Jones DB. Bariatric surgery as treatment for type 2 diabetes. Curr 
Diab Rep. 2010;10(4):261–3.
 115. Wong KE, Szeto FL, Zhang W, Ye H, Kong J, Zhang Z, et al. Involvement of the vitamin D 
receptor in energy metabolism: regulation of uncoupling proteins. Am J Physiol Endocrinol 
Metab. 2009;296(4):E820–8.
 116. Wong KE, Kong J, Zhang W, Szeto FL, Ye H, Deb DK, et al. Targeted expression of human 
vitamin D receptor in adipocytes decreases energy expenditure and induces obesity in mice. 
J Biol Chem. 2011;286:33804–10.
R. Aghamohammadzadeh and A. M. HeagertyPart III
Alteration of Cardiovascular Control Systems291 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_21
S. Taddei ( *) · R. M. Bruno · S. Masi 
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
e-mail: stefano.taddei@med.unipi.it21Endothelial Dysfunction in Early Phases 
of Hypertension
Stefano Taddei, Rosa Maria Bruno, and Stefano Masi
21.1  Introduction
Nitric oxide (NO) is produced from the amino acid l-arginine by an enzyme called 
NO synthase (NOS) and represents a key molecule regulating vascular homeostasis 
[1]. Cofactors, such as nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, flavin mono-
nucleotide, flavin adenine dinucleotide, tetrabiopterin and heme, are necessary for 
NOS activity. NOS is present in three isoforms in different tissues: neuronal NOS, 
inducible NOS and endothelial NOS (eNOS). The latter is a constitutive enzyme 
isoform, first discovered in endothelial cells. The activity of eNOS, as well as NO 
release from the endothelium, is stimulated by receptor-mediated mechanisms (ace-
tylcholine, bradykinin, serotonin, substance P, adenosine diphosphate) but also by 
mechanical stimuli (Fig.  21.1). In particular shear stress, namely, tangential cyclic 
stress generated on vascular walls by blood flow, is the most powerful mechanism 
of stimulated NO release. In turn, main stimuli with a negative influence on eNOS 
expression are hypoxia, tumour necrosis factor-α and inflammatory cytokines. False 
eNOS substrates, such as N-monomethyl-l-arginine (l-NMMA), can also reduce 
NO bioavailability and are commonly used to test the degree of endothelium-depen-
dent vasodilation [2].
Endothelial dysfunction is detected in several pathological conditions and is 
characterised by an imbalance between substances with vasodilating, antimito-
genic and anti-thrombogenic properties and substances with vasoconstricting, 
prothrombotic and proliferative characteristics (also known with the generic term 
endothelium-derived contracting factors, EDCFs) (Fig.  21.1). Thus, given that NO 
exerts vasodilatory action on vascular smooth muscle cells but also inhibits plate-
let adhesion and aggregation, leukocyte adhesion and migration as well as smooth 292
muscle cell proliferation [3], it appears evident that reduced NO bioavailability in 
the vasculature is the main pathophysiological alteration encountered in endothelial 
dysfunction.
21.2  How to Assess Endothelial Function
Different techniques have been developed to assess vascular properties in humans, 
including biochemical and genetic markers, as well as vascular reactivity tests [4].
The first demonstration of endothelial dysfunction in atherosclerotic coronary 
arteries dates back to 1986 [5 ]. Later, peripheral vascular beds that were easily 
accessible, such as the upper limbs, were interrogated to assess the presence and 
severity of endothelial dysfunction in humans, using minimally invasive or non-
invasive techniques [4 ]. While each approach has its advantages and disadvan-
tages, as well as its peculiar characteristics (Table  21.1), all these vascular tests 
are based on the same principle. In healthy conditions, arteries dilate in response 
to non-pharmacological (i.e. reactive hyperemia) or pharmacological stimuli 
AGGREGATION
Renin
Renin
ATG AT-I
AT-IIACE ET-1
ET-1
AT1PGH2
TXA2
ETBETATX
CONTRACTIONThrombin AT-II
AT1 T
Mitocondria
eNOS
L-ArgNOPGI2EDHF
Endotheliu m
EDHFs PGI2 NO
–∑ O2-Shear
Stress
cGMPcGMP
K+ Smooth
muscle
cells
RELAXATIONINHIBITION
MP ETBS1BKBK ET ADPAchPlatelet s
5-HT
NADPH-oxidase
CyclooxigenaseXanthine-
oxidaseTGFβ1
Fig. 21.1 Nitric oxide (NO) and other endothelium-derived factors and their role in vascular 
homeostasis. TGF transforming growth factor, AT  angiotensin, ATG  angiotensinogen, ET endothe-
lin, ACE angiotensin converting enzyme, TX thromboxane, PG prostaglandin, NADPH nicotin-
amide dinucleotide phosphate, eNOS endothelial NO synthase, l-Arg l-Arginine, Ach acetylcholine, 
ADP adenosine diphosphate, cGMP cyclic guanosine monophosphate, EDHF endothelium-
derived hyperpolarizing factors, 5-HT serotonin, BK Bradykinin. From [2], with permission
S. Taddei et al.293
Table 21.1 Advantages and disadvantages of the most commonly used techniques to assess endo-
thelial function
Technique Vascular bed Advantages DisadvantagesStimulus 
(examples)
Coronary 
epicardial 
vasoreactivity 
(quantitative 
coronary 
angiography)Epicardial 
macrovascular
Conduit arteriesAssessment directly 
in the coronary 
vascular bed
Gold standardInvasive
Expensive
Time consuming
Limited to those 
undergoing 
coronary 
angiographyAch
Exercise
Pacing
Cold Pressor 
Test
Coronary 
microvascular 
function (Doppler 
wire)Coronary 
microvascular
Resistance 
arteriesAssessment directly 
in the coronary 
microvasculatureInvasive
Expensive
Time consuming
Limited to those 
undergoing 
coronary 
angiographyAch
Adenosine
Papaverine
Coronary 
microvascular 
function (PET)Coronary 
microvascularCoronary district 
assessment
Non-invasiveLess 
endothelium-
specificAdenosine/
dipyridamole
Cold pressor 
test
Mental stress
Venous occlusion 
plethysmographyForearm 
vasculature
MicrovasculatureEasy access
Vasoactive 
substances infused 
to generate a 
dose-response 
relationship
Contralateral arm as 
a control
Accurate and 
reproducibleInvasive 
(cannulation of 
the brachial 
artery)
Time consuming
Challenging for 
serial 
measurementsAch and other 
vasoactive 
substances
Flow-mediated 
dilationBrachial artery
Conduit arteryEasy access
Correlation with 
invasive epicardial 
vascular function
Many outcome 
studies
Inexpensive
Possibility to assess 
other important 
parameters (flow, 
baseline arterial 
diameter, flow-
mediated 
constriction)Challenging to 
perform well
Disparate 
protocols for 
performance and 
standardisations
Need for 
standardisationReactive 
Hyperemia
Peripheral arterial 
tonometryPeripheral 
arteriesNon-invasive, easy 
to use,
not user-dependent,
automatic analysis,
reliable and 
reproducibleExpense of
disposable
finger probes
Less 
endothelium-
specificReactive 
Hyperemia
Ach Acetylcholine. Adapted from Flammer AJ et al., and [71], with permission21 Endothelial Dysfunction in Early Phases of Hypertension294
(acetylcholine, bradykinin or serotonin) (Fig.  21.1). In disease states the vasodila-
tion induced by these stimuli is reduced or absent, as a result of a reduced NO 
availability. Endothelium-dependent responses should always be compared to 
endothelium-independent responses (obtained by exogenous NO donors or other 
vasodilators), to exclude structural vascular alterations and alterations in smooth 
muscles cells.
21.2.1  Invasive Techniques
21.2.1.1  Coronary Epicardial Function and Microvascular Function
Endothelial function can be measured in epicardial as well as resistance coronary 
vessels using several methods. Although these methods are limited by the invasive 
nature, their advantage is to measure endothelial function directly in this clinically 
important vascular bed.
The epicardial endothelial function is evaluated by quantitative coronary angiog-
raphy or intravascular ultrasound, measuring changes in vessel diameter and cross-
sectional area in response to endothelium-dependent stimuli. After acetylcholine 
infusion, vessels and segments with an intact endothelium vasodilate, whereas ves-
sels and segments with dysfunctional or disrupted endothelium, will respond with 
vasoconstriction due to a direct activation of muscarinic receptors on vascular 
smooth muscle cells [5].
Changes in coronary or myocardial blood flow in response to endothelium-
dependent vasodilators can be used as a surrogate parameter for microvascular 
function [6]. Other methods to estimate microvascular function have been intro-
duced, such as the measurement of the number of cineangiographic frames that it 
takes to fill a distal vessel with a proximal injection of contrast (the so-called cor -
rected TIMI frame count) [7]. Recently, non-invasive functional tests have been 
developed, among them positron emission tomography, myocardial perfusion imag-
ing, blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) MRI and echocardiography [8].
21.2.1.2  Peripheral Microcirculation
Venous plethysmography is a semi-invasive technique providing information on the 
changes in forearm blood volume before and after infusion of vasoactive substances 
into a cannulated brachial artery, with virtually no systemic effects. Thus, this tech-
nique allows the accurate exploration of microvascular pathophysiological mecha-
nisms in health and disease [9]. Furthermore, endothelial function in the forearm 
microcirculation correlated well with that of the cardiac district [10].
Subcutaneous microcirculation can be studied using the Halpern-Mulvany myo-
graph system, an in vitro ex vivo technique [11]. This technique allows to assess 
functional characteristics of isolated resistance arterioles (lumen diameter 150–
300 μm), taken from subcutaneous tissue obtained by skin biopsies. Once cleaned 
of adherent connective tissue, vessels are investigated with the “wire myograph” or 
the “pressure myograph”. The first technique implies that two wires are threaded 
through the vessel, while in the pressurised system, the artery is slipped into two 
S. Taddei et al.295
glass microcannula and exposed to a constant pressure. Both techniques have docu-
mented a reduced endothelial function in small subcutaneous arteries of hyperten-
sive patients [12]. As an in vitro technique, such methodology allows exploration of 
several pathways and testing of many compounds not applicable in vivo, although 
the prognostic value of endothelial dysfunction in isolated small vessels from hyper -
tensive patients is still under debate.
21.2.2  Non-invasive Techniques
Non-invasive techniques to assess macrovascular as well as microvascular endothe-
lial function in peripheral arteries have been developed. These measurements have 
been shown to correlate reasonably with coronary vascular function, confirming 
that endothelial dysfunction is a systemic condition [13, 14].
21.2.2.1  Flow-Mediated Vasodilation of Brachial Artery
Among different techniques measuring endothelial function, brachial artery flow-
mediated dilation (FMD) is one of the most used for its non-invasiveness. This 
technique is based on the physiological response of endothelial cells to shear stress 
that stimulates production of NO and other endothelium-derived relaxing factors, 
ultimately leading to vasodilation [15]. FMD involves measurement, by means of 
high-resolution ultrasound, of the change in diameter of a conduit artery (the bra-
chial or radial artery) in response to increased flow, typically induced by a period of 
ischaemia in the distal circulatory bed [4]. Accordingly, FMD is a tool for examin-
ing the pathophysiology of CVD, identifying subjects at increased risk for future 
CV events, but also has merit in examining the impact of physiological and pharma-
cological interventions in humans. In recent years, a large number of studies dem-
onstrated the prognostic value of brachial artery FMD for prediction of CV events, 
as summarised in several meta-analyses [16].
Despite concerns about its reproducibility, strong evidence shows that highly 
reliable FMD measurements are achieved when specialised laboratories follow 
strict standardised protocols [12].
21.2.2.2  Finger Plethysmography
Another technique which can be used to assess endothelial function is peripheral 
arterial tonometry, which is based on the finger arterial pulse wave amplitude 
(EndoPAT, Itamar Medical) [17]. Augmentation of the pulse amplitude after 
reactive hyperemia relies on the complex vascular response that also involves 
NO. As such, the EndoPAT has been suggested as a reliable measure of endothe-
lial function [18].
Similar to the assessment of endothelial function with FMD, a pressure cuff is 
placed on one arm, and after obtaining baseline blood volume changes, the blood 
pressure cuff is inflated above systolic pressure and deflated after 5 min to induce 
reactive hyperemia on the same arm. The main advantages of the system are the use 
of the contralateral arm as an internal control and the nonoperator dependency.21 Endothelial Dysfunction in Early Phases of Hypertension296
However, to date a number of methodological, pathophysiological and clinical 
aspects still need to be clarified before the future and possible application of this 
user-friendly technique will be defined [19].
21.3  Endothelial Dysfunction: Clinical Aspects
21.3.1  Endothelial Function and Cardiovascular Risk Factors
Endothelial dysfunction, involving both micro- and macrocirculation of car -
diac and peripheral districts, is a common trait of essentially all cardiovascular 
risk factors [20]. Impaired endothelial homeostasis (commonly detected in the 
form of an abnormal vasomotor response) is observed with ageing, after chronic 
or acute smoking, in hypercholesterolemia or hypertriglyceridemia, in type I 
and II diabetes mellitus and in hypertension and metabolic syndrome [20]. A 
meta-analysis of 211 cross-sectional studies, including almost 12,000 patients, 
found a significant relationship between FMD and Framingham risk score, 
which is more evident in low-risk subjects [21]. Thus, endothelial dysfunction 
may represent the sum of the detrimental effect of these risk factors on vascular 
health.
Endothelial dysfunction is an early step in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. 
In a cross-sectional study in middle-aged healthy men, there is no evident correla-
tion between brachial FMD and the carotid intima-media thickness (IMT) [22], 
whereas FMD predicted IMT progression both in healthy subjects [23] and in 
hypertensive, postmenopausal women [24]. Similarly, endothelial function is not 
related to arterial stiffness, measured as pulse wave velocity, in healthy individu-
als [25], while the relationship is significant in patients with cardiovascular risk 
factors such as diabetes [26].
21.3.2  Endothelial Function and Cardiovascular Events
The presence of endothelial dysfunction is an independent predictor of all different 
type of clinical events. Its prognostic role has been demonstrated peripheral arterial 
diseases as well as coronary heart disease, independently from the endothelial stim-
ulus used to test vascular reactivity [27, 28]. Several studies have assessed whether 
endothelial function provides additional prognostic information to estimate the risk 
of cardiovascular disease compared to traditional risk factors and risk score algo-
rithms. In recent years, a large number of studies demonstrated the prognostic value 
of brachial artery FMD for prediction of CV events, as summarised in several meta-
analyses [16, 28–30]. These meta-analyses showed a significant pooled relative risk 
reduction of 8–13% in CV events per percent point increase in brachial FMD, 
despite the heterogeneity of study selection criteria populations included. This 
reduction was either similar in high- and low-risk populations [28, 30] or greater in 
patients with established CVD [16, 29].
S. Taddei et al.297
Several [31–35], but not all [36], population studies recognised the added value 
of the endothelial function in primary prevention. In the Multi-Ethnic Study of 
Atherosclerosis, FMD predicted future cardiovascular events, even after adjusting 
for the Framingham risk score [37]. Though the addition of FMD to the Framingham 
risk score did not improve c-statistics, it led to a significant reclassification improve-
ment of patients at low, intermediate or high cardiovascular risk for cardiovascular 
disease when compared to the Framingham risk score alone [37].
Taken together, these studies indicate that the measure of endothelial function 
adds additional information to the patient cardiovascular risk stratification, going 
beyond the detrimental effects of classical cardiovascular risk factors on endothe-
lium. New variables reflecting different aspects of vascular function might also have 
predictive value. Both hyperemia-induced shear stress and velocity changes showed 
even stronger correlations with the presence of cardiovascular risk factors than 
FMD [38]. In the FATE study, which included 1574 middle-aged, apparently healthy 
men at low cardiovascular risk, hyperemic velocity in the brachial artery, but not 
FMD, was associated with future clinical events, independently from Framingham 
risk score [39]. In another community-based cohort study, forearm microvascular 
endothelial function, assessed with Ach infusion, but not FMD, was associated with 
cardiovascular events in elderly patients, improving cardiovascular risk stratifica-
tion compared to the Framingham risk score alone [40]. Similarly, microvascular 
endothelial dysfunction, measured by peripheral arterial tonometry, predicted 
adverse cardiac events in 270 outpatients, independently from cardiovascular risk 
factors [41]. Despite endothelial function measurements are not yet recommended 
by guidelines for cardiovascular prevention [42, 43], these studies, together with 
advances in the standardisation of non-invasive approaches, might make the assess-
ment of endothelial function an important tool to refine cardiovascular risk stratifi-
cation in clinical practice in the future.
21.4  Endothelial Function in Essential Hypertension
Several studies have demonstrated that endothelial dysfunction is a hallmark of 
arterial hypertension [44], but it is not a consequence of high blood pressure values 
[45]. Indeed, impaired endothelium-dependent vasodilation is observed in young 
offspring of hypertensive subjects despite the presence of normal blood pressure 
values [46]. In addition, there is no relationship between endothelium-dependent 
relaxation and blood pressure values; such a relationship is instead observed with 
levels of LDL-cholesterol [47, 48]. Finally, the simple reduction of blood pressure 
does not restore or improve endothelium-dependent vasodilation [49, 50]. The ben-
eficial effect on endothelial function observed for different classes of antihyperten-
sive medications is independent on blood pressure normalisation and likely related 
to specific pleiotropic effects of a drug or classes of drugs. Collectively, this evi-
dence suggests that endothelial dysfunction may precede the onset of hypertension, 
does not reflect the severity of the disease and should not be used to monitor the 
efficacy of blood pressure lowering treatment.21 Endothelial Dysfunction in Early Phases of Hypertension298
An increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and elevated vascular 
wall oxidative stress are important determinants of endothelial dysfunction in 
hypertension [9]. ROS, mainly superoxide anions, consist of radical and non-radical 
oxygen species formed by the partial reduction of oxygen. They rapidly react with 
NO producing peroxynitrites, thus reducing NO availability (Fig.  21.1) [2]. In addi-
tion, peroxynitrites have several negative effects on vascular function and structure. 
The importance of ROS in mediating endothelial dysfunction is confirmed by the 
evidence that infusion of ROS scavengers, such as vitamin C, can acutely restore 
NO bioavailability and improve endothelium-dependent vasodilation in hyperten-
sive patients [9]. Several enzymatic and nonenzymatic sources of ROS have been 
described within the arterial wall, including NAD(P)H-oxidase, xanthine oxidase, 
cyclooxygenase and uncoupled endothelial NO synthase [51] (Fig.  21.1). In clinical 
conditions characterised by reduced NO-dependent vasodilation, such as essential 
hypertension, the endothelium produces another relaxing factor, known as an endo-
thelium-derived hyperpolarising factor (EDHF). This controls vasomotor tone 
inducing the opening of the smooth muscle large-conductance K Ca channels, there-
fore promoting potassium efflux and hyperpolarisation of vascular smooth muscle 
cells [52] (Fig. 21.1).
21.4.1  Endothelium-Derived Contracting Factors: 
Human Evidence
The endothelium controls the vasomotor tone also by production of several vaso-
constricting agents, collectively identified as endothelium-derived contracting fac-
tors (EDCFs). These EDCFs might play an important role in controlling vasomotor 
tone in several pathological conditions, including essential hypertension [53].
The principal EDCF is endothelin-1 (ET-1), generated by the vascular endothe-
lium, which acts through specific ETA and ETB receptors. ETA receptors are 
located on smooth muscle cells and promote growth and contraction. ETB receptors 
are located on both endothelial and smooth muscle cells, with opposite effects. 
Activation of smooth muscle cell ETB evokes contraction, whereas activation of 
endothelial ETB induces relaxation [54]. The overall biological effect of these acti-
vated receptors on the vasculature results from the balance between their protective 
and deleterious effects. By utilising the isolated forearm technique, an increased 
vasoconstrictor activity of endogenous ET-1 was demonstrated in essential hyper -
tensive patients in comparison to normotensive individuals [54].
Endoperoxides derived from the metabolism of arachidonic acid by COX activ-
ity represent other important EDCFs [55]. Human and animal experiments confirm 
the role of COX in mediating endothelial dysfunction in hypertension. For example, 
the production of ROS following acetylcholine infusion in spontaneously hyperten-
sive rat aorta is prevented by indomethacin, suggesting COX as a main source of 
ROS in such conditions. In turn, ROS can amplify the EDCF-mediated effect, either 
by triggering EDCF-mediated responses or indirectly by reducing the availability of 
NO, thus favouring the occurrence of EDCF response [55, 56].
S. Taddei et al.299
21.4.2  The Source of EDCFs
Several animal experiments confirm that the metabolism of arachidonic acid via 
endothelial COX generates molecules which contribute to endothelium-dependent 
vasoconstriction. These COX-derived EDCFs diffuse to the underlying vascular 
smooth muscle cells and, through the activation of specific receptors (TP receptors), 
induce smooth muscle cell contraction [57]. Accordingly, most COX-mediated 
EDCFs effects are inhibited by TP-receptor antagonists [58, 59].
Most of the available data on EDCFs in humans have been obtained in essential 
hypertensive patients. As already mentioned, human hypertension is associated with 
a reduced NO availability [44]. The first experiments assessing the role of EDCFs 
on endothelial dysfunction in the forearm microcirculation of essential hypertensive 
patients demonstrated that intraarterial administration of the COX inhibitor indo-
methacin improved the vasodilation to acetylcholine and restored the inhibitory 
effect of l-NMMA on that response, indicating that COX generates substances that 
reduce the availability of NO [60]. Moreover, intraarterial infusion of the ROS scav-
enger ascorbic acid evoked similar effect as indomethacin in these patients, with no 
further potentiation of the vasodilatory response when the two compounds were 
confused [9]. These findings demonstrate that the COX pathway is a source of ROS 
in essential hypertension. Of note, COX-inhibition failed to affect the acetylcholine-
induced relaxation in the forearm microcirculation of patients with secondary forms 
of hypertension [61], thus suggesting that EDCFs production is not a consequence 
of a mere blood pressure increase, but might be genetically related to essential 
hypertension.
21.4.3  Vascular COX-2 Isoform
There are two different isoforms of COX: COX-1 and COX-2 [62]. In most tissues, 
COX-1 is constitutively expressed, accounting for a baseline production of physiolog-
ical prostanoids, while COX-2 is often induced by a number of stimuli, including 
inflammation or growth factors [63]. Nevertheless, endothelial and vascular smooth 
muscle cells constitutively express both isoforms, with COX-1 being usually expressed 
to a greater extent than COX-2 [63]. Recently, we investigated which COX isoform 
contributes to ROS generation in human hypertension. Using small resistance arteries 
from hypertensive patients, we showed that the blunted vascular response to acetyl-
choline was not improved by the COX-1 inhibitor SC-560, while it was significantly 
enhanced by the selective COX-2 inhibitor Dup-697, which also partially restored the 
inhibitory effect of l -NAME on acetylcholine [40]. In addition, we documented an 
augmented COX-2 protein expression in vessels from these patients, with a marked 
upregulation of COX-2 mainly in the vascular media layer [55]. These alterations in 
COX-2 expression were accompanied by an increased concentration of vascular 
superoxide anions, which was dramatically reduced after incubation with the selective 
COX-2 inhibitor and moderately blunted by the antioxidant apocynin. These data pro-
vided the first evidence that in small arteries isolated from essential hypertensive 21 Endothelial Dysfunction in Early Phases of Hypertension300
patients, COX-2 is overexpressed and hyperactivated, playing a major role in reducing 
NO availability by increasing vascular levels of superoxide anions. In addition, as 
apocynin is a selective inhibitor of the NAD(P)H-oxidase, our data suggested that this 
enzyme is likely to account for most of the increased superoxide anion production 
observed in small arteries of hypertensive patients as a result of COX-2 hyperactiva-
tion. Other evidence has since confirmed the role of COX-2 as a major source of ROS 
generation in essential hypertension (Fig. 21.2).
21.4.4  Endothelial Dysfunction and Ageing
Ageing per se is the most powerful determinant of endothelial dysfunction and is 
accompanied by a progressive worsening of NO availability in resistance vessels 
[12, 64, 65] (Fig.  21.2). The earliest alteration of vascular homeostasis accounting 
for the endothelial dysfunction observed with ageing is a reduced availability of 
l-arginine, the substrate necessary for NO production by the eNOS. Indeed, l-argi-
nine supplementation improves endothelial dysfunction in young adults (<30 years) 
[64]. With advancing age, however, along with the impaired l-arginine-NO pathway, P < 0.05P < 0.05
P < 0.05 P < 0.05
P < 0.05
P < 0.0001
P < 0.0001
P < 0.05
Age-group interaction = 0.25
< 3050
40
30
20
10
0
31-45
Age (years)Inhibition by L-NAME
on response to Ach (%)
46-60 > 60
Fig. 21.2 Hypertension causes premature ageing of endothelial function in isolated small arteries 
from humans. l-NAME, N(G)-Nitro-l-arginine methyl ester; Ach, acetylcholine. Red box-plots, 
normotensive individuals; light blue box-plots, hypertensive individuals. Adapted from [12], with 
permission
S. Taddei et al.301
COX-dependent EDCF production becomes the prominent pathway accounting for 
age-related endothelial dysfunction. Indeed, in middle-aged adults (31–45 years), 
indomethacin or vitamin C begins to show some effect on endothelial-dependent 
vasodilation. This effect becomes highly significant in late adult and elderly patients 
(46–60 and >60 years) [64]. Such age-related transition in the pathways account-
ing for endothelial dysfunction is anticipated by hypertension, as confirmed by the 
evidence of an increased production of COX-dependent EDCFs and ROS in the 
vascular wall of hypertensive compared to normotensive subjects.
In conclusion, ageing is an important factor altering endothelium-dependent 
vasodilation. The most important mechanisms accounting for age-related endothe-
lial dysfunction include a defect in the l-arginine-NO pathway and an upregulated 
production of COX-dependent EDCFs. Whereas in normotensive subjects the age-
related alteration of both NO and EDCF production is detected only in old age, in 
patients with hypertension, these pathways seem to be altered early and to anticipate 
the age-related increase of blood pressure values through accelerated vascular 
remodelling.
21.5  Endothelial Dysfunction in Prehypertension
Considering the evidence that endothelial dysfunction can precede the onset of 
hypertension, it is conceivable that prehypertension might be characterised by a 
generalised endothelial alteration.
In line with this possibility, a study from Weil et al. [66] confirms the presence of 
impaired endothelium-dependent vasodilation in patients with prehypertension and 
that this alteration is characterised by a reduced NO availability. Using the perfused 
forearm technique, the authors demonstrated that the vasodilation to acetylcholine 
is significantly lower (around 30%) in prehypertensive patients as compared to 
matched normotensive subjects. Because the response to sodium nitroprusside was 
similar in the two study subgroups, the altered response to acetylcholine must be 
considered specific for an altered endothelial cell function, resulting in a compro-
mised microvascular reactivity. Remarkably, infusion of l-NMMA, an eNOS antag-
onist, significantly blunted the vasodilating effect of acetylcholine in healthy 
controls but did not cause changes prehypertensive patients. These results demon-
strate that prehypertension is characterised by impaired endothelium-dependent 
vasodilation caused by impaired NO availability, an alteration which is commonly 
observed in patients with established essential hypertension.
Over and above the role of intracellular pathways, an altered repair capacity by 
the endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) is also associated with the endothelial dys-
function observed in prehypertension. Giannotti G et  al. [67] demonstrated that 
in vivo endothelial repair capacity of early EPCs is reduced in patients with prehy-
pertension, due to early cellular senescence, and is related to impaired endothelial 
function, assessed by brachial artery FMD. Importantly, the authors showed that 
similar alterations were detectable in a matched group of patients with hyperten-
sion, although they were more severe compared to prehypertensive subjects. 21 Endothelial Dysfunction in Early Phases of Hypertension302
Whether endothelial dysfunction is cause or consequence of an altered EPCs repair 
capacity in prehypertension remains unknown. Indeed, a reduced NO availability 
typically observed in endothelial dysfunction compromises EPCs mobilisation from 
the bone marrow as well as their maturation. This is confirmed by studies conducted 
in premenopausal women, in whom EPCs function and mobilisation in prehyper -
tension remain unchanged due to a preserved NO availability [68]. We confirmed 
the ability of endogenous oestrogen to protect endothelium-dependent relaxation 
from the age-related endothelial dysfunction which characterises hypertensive 
women [69].
Some study has also documented a contribution of ET system to the endothelial 
dysfunction observed in prehypertensive patients. Infusion of BQ-123, a selective 
ETA receptor antagonist, causes a greater increase in the forearm blood flow of 
prehypertensive patients as compared to healthy controls [70], demonstrating an 
increase of the ETA-mediated vasoconstrictor tone in prehypertension.
 Conclusions
There is increasing evidence that endothelial dysfunction (1) is associated with 
almost all cardiovascular risk factors; (2) precedes the development of athero-
sclerosis; (3) predicts cardiovascular events independently of classical risk 
scores; (4) might identify a subset of patients in which conventional treatment is 
not sufficient; and (5) accompanies prehypertension. After three decades of 
research, non-invasive techniques for endothelial function assessment are finally 
reaching solid standardisation and good reproducibility. Thus, although by now 
endothelial function assessment is not recommended by current guidelines, it 
might have promising clinical applications in several settings.
Acknowledgments  Disclosures: ST received research grants from Novartis, Servier, Recordati, 
Menarini and Boehringer and is on the speaker’s bureau for Servier, Recordati, Novartis and 
Boehringer.
References
 1. Furchgott RF, Zawadzki JV . The obligatory role of endothelial cells in the relaxation of arterial 
smooth muscle by acetylcholine. Nature. 1980;288:373–6.
 2. Bruno RM, Taddei S. Nitric Oxide. In: Mooren FC, Skinner JS, editors. Encyclopedia of exer -
cise medicine in health and disease. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag; 2011.
 3. Ross R. Atherosclerosis—an inflammatory disease. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:115–26.
 4. Deanfield J, Donald A, Ferri C, Giannattasio C, Halcox J, Halligan S, Lerman A, Mancia 
G, Oliver JJ, Pessina AC, Rizzoni D, Rossi GP, Salvetti A, Schiffrin EL, Taddei S, Webb 
DJ. Endothelial function and dysfunction. Part I: methodological issues for assessment in the 
different vascular beds: a statement by the Working Group on Endothelin and Endothelial 
Factors of the European Society of Hypertension. J Hypertens. 2005;23:7–17.
 5. Ludmer PL, Selwyn AP, Shook TL, Wayne RR, Mudge GH, Alexander RW, Ganz P. Paradoxical 
vasoconstriction induced by acetylcholine in atherosclerotic coronary arteries. N Engl J Med. 
1986;315:1046–51.
 6. Camici PG, Crea F. Coronary microvascular dysfunction. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:830–40.
S. Taddei et al.303
 7. Gibson CM, Cannon CP, Daley WL, Dodge JT Jr, Alexander B Jr, Marble SJ, McCabe CH, 
Raymond L, Fortin T, Poole WK, Braunwald E. TIMI frame count: a quantitative method of 
assessing coronary artery flow. Circulation. 1996;93:879–88.
 8. Leung DY , Leung M. Non-invasive/invasive imaging: significance and assessment of coronary 
microvascular dysfunction. Heart. 2011;97:587–95.
 9. Taddei S, Virdis A, Ghiadoni L, Magagna A, Salvetti A. Vitamin C improves endothelium-
dependent vasodilation by restoring nitric oxide activity in essential hypertension. Circulation. 
1998;97:2222–9.
 10. Anderson TJ, Uehata A, Gerhard MD, Meredith IT, Knab S, Delagrange D, Lieberman EH, 
Ganz P, Creager MA, Yeung AC, et al. Close relation of endothelial function in the human 
coronary and peripheral circulations. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1995;26:1235–41.
 11. Virdis A, Savoia C, Grassi G, Lembo G, Vecchione C, Seravalle G, Taddei S, V olpe M, Rosei 
EA, Rizzoni D. Evaluation of microvascular structure in humans: a ‘state-of-the-art’ document 
of the Working Group on Macrovascular and Microvascular Alterations of the Italian Society 
of Arterial Hypertension. J Hypertens. 2014;32:2120–9. discussion 2129
 12. Bruno RM, Duranti E, Ippolito C, Segnani C, Bernardini N, Di Candio G, Chiarugi M, Taddei 
S, Virdis A. Different impact of essential hypertension on structural and functional age-related 
vascular changes. Hypertension. 2017;69:71–8.
 13. Bonetti PO, Pumper GM, Higano ST, Holmes DR Jr, Kuvin JT, Lerman A. Noninvasive identi-
fication of patients with early coronary atherosclerosis by assessment of digital reactive hyper -
emia. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:2137–41.
 14. Takase B, Uehata A, Akima T, Nagai T, Nishioka T, Hamabe A, Satomura K, Ohsuzu F, Kurita 
A.  Endothelium-dependent flow-mediated vasodilation in coronary and brachial arteries in 
suspected coronary artery disease. Am J Cardiol. 1998;82:1535–9. A7-8
 15. Celermajer DS, Sorensen KE, Gooch VM, Spiegelhalter DJ, Miller OI, Sullivan ID, Lloyd JK, 
Deanfield JE. Non-invasive detection of endothelial dysfunction in children and adults at risk 
of atherosclerosis. Lancet. 1992;340:1111–5.
 16. Matsuzawa Y , Kwon TG, Lennon RJ, Lerman LO, Lerman A. Prognostic value of flow-medi-
ated vasodilation in brachial artery and fingertip artery for cardiovascular events: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc. 2015;4:e002270.
 17. Reriani MK, Lerman LO, Lerman A. Endothelial function as a functional expression of cardio-
vascular risk factors. Biomark Med. 2010;4:351–60.
 18. Nohria A, Gerhard-Herman M, Creager MA, Hurley S, Mitra D, Ganz P. Role of nitric oxide in 
the regulation of digital pulse volume amplitude in humans. J Appl Physiol. 2006;101:545–8.
 19. Bruno RM, Gori T, Ghiadoni L. Endothelial function testing and cardiovascular disease: focus 
on peripheral arterial tonometry. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2014;10:577–84.
 20. Brunner H, Cockcroft JR, Deanfield J, Donald A, Ferrannini E, Halcox J, Kiowski W, Luscher 
TF, Mancia G, Natali A, Oliver JJ, Pessina AC, Rizzoni D, Rossi GP, Salvetti A, Spieker LE, 
Taddei S, Webb DJ. Endothelial function and dysfunction. Part II: association with cardio-
vascular risk factors and diseases. A statement by the Working Group on Endothelins and 
Endothelial Factors of the European Society of Hypertension. J Hypertens. 2005;23:233–46.
 21. Witte DR, Westerink J, de Koning EJ, van der Graaf Y , Grobbee DE, Bots ML. Is the associa-
tion between flow-mediated dilation and cardiovascular risk limited to low-risk populations? J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:1987–93.
 22. Yan RT, Anderson TJ, Charbonneau F, Title L, Verma S, Lonn E. Relationship between carotid 
artery intima-media thickness and brachial artery flow-mediated dilation in middle-aged 
healthy men. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:1980–6.
 23. Halcox JP, Donald AE, Ellins E, Witte DR, Shipley MJ, Brunner EJ, Marmot MG, Deanfield 
JE. Endothelial function predicts progression of carotid intima-media thickness. Circulation. 
2009;119:1005–12.
 24. Rossi R, Nuzzo A, Olaru AI, Origliani G, Modena MG.  Endothelial function affects early 
carotid atherosclerosis progression in hypertensive postmenopausal women. J Hypertens. 
2011;29:1136–44.21 Endothelial Dysfunction in Early Phases of Hypertension304
 25. Koivistoinen T, Virtanen M, Hutri-Kahonen N, Lehtimaki T, Jula A, Juonala M, Moilanen L, 
Aatola H, Hyttinen J, Viikari JS, Raitakari OT, Kahonen M. Arterial pulse wave velocity in 
relation to carotid intima-media thickness, brachial flow-mediated dilation and carotid artery 
distensibility: The Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study and the Health 2000 Survey. 
Atherosclerosis. 2012;220:387–93.
 26. Bruno RM, Penno G, Daniele G, Pucci L, Lucchesi D, Stea F, Landini L, Cartoni G, Taddei 
S, Ghiadoni L, Del Prato S. Type 2 diabetes mellitus worsens arterial stiffness in hypertensive 
patients through endothelial dysfunction. Diabetologia. 2012;56:1847–55.
 27. Lerman A, Zeiher AM. Endothelial function: cardiac events. Circulation. 2005;111:363–8.
 28. Inaba Y , Chen JA, Bergmann SR. Prediction of future cardiovascular outcomes by flow-medi-
ated vasodilatation of brachial artery: a meta-analysis. Int J Card Imaging. 2010;26:631–40.
 29. Ras RT, Streppel MT, Draijer R, Zock PL. Flow-mediated dilation and cardiovascular risk 
prediction: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:344–51.
 30. Xu Y , Arora RC, Hiebert BM, Lerner B, Szwajcer A, McDonald K, Rigatto C, Komenda P, Sood 
MM, Tangri N. Non-invasive endothelial function testing and the risk of adverse outcomes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2014;15:736–46.
 31. Rossi R, Nuzzo A, Origliani G, Modena MG. Prognostic role of flow-mediated dilation and 
cardiac risk factors in post-menopausal women. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;51:997–1002.
 32. Yeboah J, Crouse JR, Hsu FC, Burke GL, Herrington DM. Brachial flow-mediated dilation 
predicts incident cardiovascular events in older adults: the Cardiovascular Health Study. 
Circulation. 2007;115:2390–7.
 33. Shechter M, Issachar A, Marai I, Koren-Morag N, Freinark D, Shahar Y , Shechter A, Feinberg 
MS. Long-term association of brachial artery flow-mediated vasodilation and cardiovascular 
events in middle-aged subjects with no apparent heart disease. Int J Cardiol. 2009;134:52–8.
 34. Neunteufl T, Heher S, Katzenschlager R, Wolfl G, Kostner K, Maurer G, Weidinger F. Late 
prognostic value of flow-mediated dilation in the brachial artery of patients with chest pain. 
Am J Cardiol. 2000;86:207–10.
 35. Hirsch L, Shechter A, Feinberg MS, Koren-Morag N, Shechter M.  The impact of early 
compared to late morning hours on brachial endothelial function and long-term cardio-
vascular events in healthy subjects with no apparent coronary heart disease. Int J Cardiol. 
2011;151:342–7.
 36. Shimbo D, Grahame-Clarke C, Miyake Y , Rodriguez C, Sciacca R, Di Tullio M, Boden-Albala 
B, Sacco R, Homma S. The association between endothelial dysfunction and cardiovascular 
outcomes in a population-based multi-ethnic cohort. Atherosclerosis. 2007;192:197–203.
 37. Yeboah J, Folsom AR, Burke GL, Johnson C, Polak JF, Post W, Lima JA, Crouse JR, 
Herrington DM. Predictive value of brachial flow-mediated dilation for incident cardiovascu-
lar events in a population-based study: the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis. Circulation. 
2009;120:502–9.
 38. Philpott AC, Lonn E, Title LM, Verma S, Buithieu J, Charbonneau F, Anderson TJ. Comparison 
of new measures of vascular function to flow mediated dilatation as a measure of cardiovascu-
lar risk factors. Am J Cardiol. 2009;103:1610–5.
 39. Anderson TJ, Charbonneau F, Title LM, Buithieu J, Rose MS, Conradson H, Hildebrand K, 
Fung M, Verma S, Lonn EM. Microvascular function predicts cardiovascular events in pri-
mary prevention: long-term results from the Firefighters and Their Endothelium (FATE) study. 
Circulation. 2011;123:163–9.
 40. Lind L, Berglund L, Larsson A, Sundstrom J. Endothelial function in resistance and conduit 
arteries and 5-year risk of cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 2011;123:1545–51.
 41. Rubinshtein R, Kuvin JT, Soffler M, Lennon RJ, Lavi S, Nelson RE, Pumper GM, Lerman LO, 
Lerman A. Assessment of endothelial function by non-invasive peripheral arterial tonometry 
predicts late cardiovascular adverse events. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:1142–8.
 42. Graham I, Atar D, Borch-Johnsen K, Boysen G, Burell G, Cifkova R, Dallongeville J, De 
Backer G, Ebrahim S, Gjelsvik B, Herrmann-Lingen C, Hoes A, Humphries S, Knapton 
M, Perk J, Priori SG, Pyorala K, Reiner Z, Ruilope L, Sans-Menendez S, Op Reimer WS, 
S. Taddei et al.305
Weissberg P, Wood D, Yarnell J, Zamorano JL, Walma E, Fitzgerald T, Cooney MT, Dudina 
A, Vahanian A, Camm J, De Caterina R, Dean V , Dickstein K, Funck-Brentano C, Filippatos 
G, Hellemans I, Kristensen SD, McGregor K, Sechtem U, Silber S, Tendera M, Widimsky 
P, Altiner A, Bonora E, Durrington PN, Fagard R, Giampaoli S, Hemingway H, Hakansson 
J, Kjeldsen SE, Larsen L, Mancia G, Manolis AJ, Orth-Gomer K, Pedersen T, Rayner M, 
Ryden L, Sammut M, Schneiderman N, Stalenhoef AF, Tokgozoglu L, Wiklund O, Zampelas 
A.  European guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice: full text. 
Fourth Joint Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and other societies on cardio-
vascular disease prevention in clinical practice (constituted by representatives of nine societies 
and by invited experts). Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2007;14(Suppl 2):S1–113.
 43. Greenland P, Alpert JS, Beller GA, Benjamin EJ, Budoff MJ, Fayad ZA, Foster E, Hlatky 
MA, Hodgson JM, Kushner FG, Lauer MS, Shaw LJ, Smith SC Jr, Taylor AJ, Weintraub 
WS, Wenger NK, Jacobs AK, Anderson JL, Albert N, Buller CE, Creager MA, Ettinger SM, 
Guyton RA, Halperin JL, Hochman JS, Nishimura R, Ohman EM, Page RL, Stevenson WG, 
Tarkington LG, Yancy CW. 2010 ACCF/AHA guideline for assessment of cardiovascular risk 
in asymptomatic adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56:e50–103.
 44. Mordi I, Mordi N, Delles C, Tzemos N. Endothelial dysfunction in human essential hyperten-
sion. J Hypertens. 2016;34:1464–72.
 45. Taddei S, Bruno RM. Endothelial dysfunction in hypertension: achievements and open ques-
tions. J Hypertens. 2016;34:1492–3.
 46. Taddei S, Virdis A, Mattei P, Ghiadoni L, Sudano I, Salvetti A. Defective L-arginine-nitric 
oxide pathway in offspring of essential hypertensive patients. Circulation. 1996;94:1298–303.
 47. John S, Schmieder RE. Impaired endothelial function in arterial hypertension and hypercho-
lesterolemia: potential mechanisms and differences. J Hypertens. 2000;18:363–74.
 48. Benjamin EJ, Larson MG, Keyes MJ, Mitchell GF, Vasan RS, Keaney JF Jr, Lehman BT, Fan 
S, Osypiuk E, Vita JA. Clinical correlates and heritability of flow-mediated dilation in the com-
munity: the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 2004;109:613–9.
 49. Ghiadoni L, Magagna A, Versari D, Kardasz I, Huang Y , Taddei S, Salvetti A. Different effect of 
antihypertensive drugs on conduit artery endothelial function. Hypertension. 2003;41(6):1281.
 50. Ried K, Sullivan TR, Fakler P, Frank OR, Stocks NP.  Effect of cocoa on blood pressure. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;8:CD008893.
 51. Munzel T, Gori T, Bruno RM, Taddei S. Is oxidative stress a therapeutic target in cardiovascu-
lar disease? Eur Heart J. 2010;31:2741–8.
 52. Taddei S, Versari D, Cipriano A, Ghiadoni L, Galetta F, Franzoni F, Magagna A, Virdis A, 
Salvetti A. Identification of a cytochrome P450 2C9-derived endothelium-derived hyperpolar -
izing factor in essential hypertensive patients. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:508–15.
 53. Luscher TF. Imbalance of endothelium-derived relaxing and contracting factors. A new con-
cept in hypertension? Am J Hypertens. 1990;3:317–30.
 54. Taddei S, Virdis A, Ghiadoni L, Sudano I, Magagna A, Salvetti A. Role of endothelin in the 
control of peripheral vascular tone in human hypertension. Heart Fail Rev. 2001;6:277–85.
 55. Virdis A, Bacca A, Colucci R, Duranti E, Fornai M, Materazzi G, Ippolito C, Bernardini 
N, Blandizzi C, Bernini G, Taddei S. Endothelial dysfunction in small arteries of essential 
hypertensive patients: role of cyclooxygenase-2 in oxidative stress generation. Hypertension. 
2013;62:337–44.
 56. Taddei S, Virdis A, Ghiadoni L, Salvetti A. Vascular effects of endothelin-1 in essential hyper -
tension: relationship with cyclooxygenase-derived endothelium-dependent contracting factors 
and nitric oxide. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2000;35:S37–40.
 57. Vanhoutte PM, Feletou M, Taddei S. Endothelium-dependent contractions in hypertension. Br 
J Pharmacol. 2005;144:449–58.
 58. Yang D, Feletou M, Boulanger CM, Wu HF, Levens N, Zhang JN, Vanhoutte PM. Oxygen-
derived free radicals mediate endothelium-dependent contractions to acetylcholine in aortas 
from spontaneously hypertensive rats. Br J Pharmacol. 2002;136:104–10.21 Endothelial Dysfunction in Early Phases of Hypertension306
 59. Virdis A, Colucci R, Fornai M, Duranti E, Giannarelli C, Bernardini N, Segnani C, Ippolito C, 
Antonioli L, Blandizzi C, Taddei S, Salvetti A, Del Tacca M. Cyclooxygenase-1 is involved 
in endothelial dysfunction of mesenteric small arteries from angiotensin II-infused mice. 
Hypertension. 2007;49:679–86.
 60. Taddei S, Virdis A, Ghiadoni L, Magagna A, Salvetti A. Cyclooxygenase inhibition restores 
nitric oxide activity in essential hypertension. Hypertension. 1997;29:274–9.
 61. Taddei S, Virdis A, Mattei P, Salvetti A. Vasodilation to acetylcholine in primary and second-
ary forms of human hypertension. Hypertension. 1993;21:929–33.
 62. Simmons DL, Botting RM, Hla T. Cyclooxygenase isozymes: the biology of prostaglandin 
synthesis and inhibition. Pharmacol Rev. 2004;56:387–437.
 63. Feletou M, Huang Y , Vanhoutte PM. Endothelium-mediated control of vascular tone: COX-1 
and COX-2 products. Br J Pharmacol. 2011;164:894–912.
 64. Taddei S, Virdis A, Ghiadoni L, Salvetti G, Bernini G, Magagna A, Salvetti A. Age-related 
reduction of NO availability and oxidative stress in humans. Hypertension. 2001;38:274–9.
 65. Taddei S, Virdis A, Mattei P, Ghiadoni L, Gennari A, Fasolo CB, Sudano I, Salvetti A. Aging 
and endothelial function in normotensive subjects and patients with essential hypertension. 
Circulation. 1995;91(7):1981.
 66. Weil BR, Stauffer BL, Greiner JJ, DeSouza CA. Prehypertension is associated with impaired 
nitric oxide-mediated endothelium-dependent vasodilation in sedentary adults. Am J 
Hypertens. 2011;24:976–81.
 67. Giannotti G, Doerries C, Mocharla PS, Mueller MF, Bahlmann FH, Horvath T, Jiang H, 
Sorrentino SA, Steenken N, Manes C, Marzilli M, Rudolph KL, Luscher TF, Drexler H, 
Landmesser U. Impaired endothelial repair capacity of early endothelial progenitor cells in 
prehypertension: relation to endothelial dysfunction. Hypertension. 2010;55:1389–97.
 68. Zhen Y , Xiao S, Ren Z, Shen HW, Su H, Tang YB, Zeng H. Increased endothelial progeni-
tor cells and nitric oxide in young prehypertensive women. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 
2015;17:298–305.
 69. Virdis A, Ghiadoni L, Sudano I, Buralli S, Salvetti G, Taddei S, Salvetti A. Endothelial func-
tion in hypertension: role of gender. J Hypertens Suppl. 2002;20:S11–6.
 70. Weil BR, Westby CM, Greiner JJ, Stauffer BL, DeSouza CA. Elevated endothelin-1 vasocon-
strictor tone in prehypertensive adults. Can J Cardiol. 2012;28:347–53.
 71. Flammer AJ, Anderson T, Celermajer DS, Creager MA, Deanfield J, Ganz P, Hamburg NM, 
Luscher TF, Shechter M, Taddei S, Vita JA, Lerman A. The assessment of endothelial function: 
from research into clinical practice. Circulation. 2012;126:753–67.
S. Taddei et al.307 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_22
E. Kaschina 
Center for Cardiovascular Research (CCR), Charité—Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Freie 
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Institute 
of Pharmacology, Berlin, Germany 
T. Unger ( *) 
CARIM—School for Cardiovascular Diseases, Maastricht University,  
Maastricht, The Netherlands
e-mail: t.unger@maastrichtuniversity.nl22Prehypertension and the Renin-
Angiotensin-Aldosterone System
Elena Kaschina and Thomas Unger
22.1  Introduction
The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) plays a central role in blood pressure regula-
tion. The main effector peptides of this system, the octapeptide angiotensin II (Ang 
II; Ang 1–8) and the heptapeptide angiotensin III (Ang III; Ang 2–8), act at least on 
four different receptor subtypes (ATR 1–4). Most of the classical angiotensin actions 
are mediated by the AT1 receptor (AT1R). They include generalized vasoconstric-
tion, increased release of noradrenaline, stimulation of proximal tubular reabsorp-
tion of sodium ions, secretion of aldosterone from the adrenal cortex, and cell 
growth in the arterial wall and in the heart [1]. Ang II induces endothelial dysfunc-
tion, activates prooxidant and proinflammatory processes, and promotes cardiovas-
cular remodeling, thus contributing to vascular tone regulation as well as to the 
development and progression of hypertension [2, 3].
In the past two decades, novel RAS peptides and receptors have been identified, 
including the angiotensin AT2 receptor (AT2R), angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 
(ACE2), and Ang (1–7) with its G-protein-coupled receptor Mas. The AT2R and the 
MasR form heterodimers and are functionally closely related [4]. These compo-
nents are considered as the “protective arm” of RAS because they mainly activate 
opposing actions compared to those mediated by the AT1R.308
Prehypertension is characterized by functional and structural changes in the 
microcirculation. A reduction of small arterial elasticity, the earliest predictor for 
hypertension development [5], along with endothelial dysfunction, nitric oxide defi-
ciency, accumulation of extracellular matrix, and inflammation, contributes to early 
vascular remodeling. Increased circulating and local expression of RAS compo-
nents in the vasculature and subsequently enhanced Ang II production are involved 
in these pathological processes [6]. Experimental studies in “prehypertensive” rats 
provided first evidence for the unique effect of RAS interaction on vasculature and 
blood pressure: Inhibiting the RAS by ACE inhibitors or angiotensin AT1 receptor 
antagonists (ARBs) prevented the progression of hypertension and vascular remod-
eling in young “prehypertensive” spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) [7–12]. 
Later on, investigations in humans [13–15] provided evidence that interfering with 
the RAS not only lowered blood pressure but also improved vascular factors deter -
mining vascular tone.
The present overview deals with the role of “harmful” and “protective” arms of 
RAS in prehypertension particularly in the context of early vascular remodeling. 
Furthermore, studies on pharmacological blockade of the RAS in prehypertensive 
humans are discussed.
22.2  Classical Renin-Angiotensin System
22.2.1  AT1 Receptor
Ang II constricts precapillary arterioles by activating AT1 receptors of vascular 
smooth muscle cells (VSMC). Direct vasoconstriction in the kidney leads to 
reduced renal flow and subsequent efferent arteriole constriction resulting in 
increased filtration pressure. Blood pressure-driven diuresis and sodium excretion 
generate a feedback loop on renin release. Furthermore, Ang II facilitates periph-
eral noradrenergic neurotransmission by augmenting norepinephrine release from 
sympathetic nerve terminals and by enhancing the vascular response to norepi-
nephrine. This facilitating effect is mediated by presynaptically localized AT1 
receptors [16]. Expression of endothelin-1 in response to Ang II also contributes to 
vasoconstriction [17] (Fig. 22.1).
The pathophysiological mechanisms of vascular remodeling are attributed to an 
Ang II-dependent increase of NAD(P)H oxidase activity via the AT1R in endothe-
lial and VSMCs [18, 19], thereby stimulating reactive oxygen species (ROS) and 
nitrogen (RNS) formation in the vessel wall [20]. ROS products such as superoxide 
and H 2O2 may activate mitogen-activated protein kinases, tyrosine kinases, phos-
phatases, calcium channels, and redox-sensitive transcription factors [20]. Activation 
of these signaling pathways results in cell growth and expression of proinflamma-
tory genes.
Above hypertrophic effects on the vascular wall, actions of Ang II mediated by 
ROS include vasoconstriction and decreased vasodilatation. The ROS, which is gen-
erated especially by NAD(P)H oxidase, causes lipid peroxidation and generation 
E. Kaschina and T. Unger309
of various vasoconstricting molecules such as F2 isoprostanes. On the other hand, 
ROS/RNS reduce the availability of the major vasodilator NO by reacting with 
superoxide [21].
Furthermore, via AT1R activation, Ang II controls cellular growth, migration, 
and intercellular matrix deposition and hence influences chronic adaptive changes 
in vascular growth and remodeling. Ang II stimulates the accumulation of extracel-
lular matrix proteins, like collagen, elastin, fibrillin, fibronectin, and proteoglycans, 
which induce a phenotype switch in VSMC from contractile to proliferative/syn-
thetic [22].
22.2.2  Vasopressin
Acting on AT1 receptors in hypothalamus and brainstem, Ang II or Ang III influ-
ence drinking behavior, sodium intake, natriuresis, and vasopressin release [23]. 
Vasopressin, an antidiuretic hormone, induces volume expansion followed by eleva-
tion of blood pressure. The pressor and antidiuretic actions are mediated by differ -
ent vasopressin receptor subtypes, V1a, V1b, and the V2 receptors (V1aR, V1bR, 
V2R). The V1aR are expressed abundantly in the vascular smooth muscle cells, and 
their stimulation is responsible for the vasopressor effect. Blockade of the V1aR for 
4 weeks in prehypertensive SHR could attenuate the development of hypertension 
in adult SHR [24]. This was recently supported by an increase of plasma vasopres-
sin and of renal V1aR gene and protein expressions parallel to hypertension 
Ang II 
Aldosterone synthase
(ALDOS)Adrenal cortex
CYP11B2 gene AT1 RRenin
MR antagonists AldosteroneCholesterol
18-OH-Corticosterone
Prehypertension, HypertensionDecrease in renal
perfusion
(juxtaglomerular
apparatus)
Endothelial dysfunction
VasoconstrictionVascular remodelingOxidative stress NO
InflammationNADPH oxidase
Vascular fibrosis
Increased peripheral resistanceBlood VesselsMR
V1RAT1R
Renal tubular
epithelial cells
Sodium and fluid
retention
Volume overloadIncreased
sympathoexcitatory
responses Central
nervous system MR MR
VRAng – (1-7) Mas RACE-2Ang III  
Ang IV AT1R antagonists
AT2RAng I ACE
ACE Inhibitors 
NEPVascular
protectionAngiotensinogen
Fig. 22.1 Mechanisms of RAS—mediated prehypertension. Ang angiotensin, AT1R angiotensin 
AT1 receptor, AT2R angiotensin AT2 receptor, ACE  angiotensin converting enzyme, ALDOS aldo-
sterone synthase, MR mineralocorticoid receptor, NADPH Nicotinamidadenindinucleotidphosphat, 
NO nitric oxide, NEP neprilysin, VR vasopressin receptor, V1R type 1 vasopressin receptor, Mas R 
Mas receptor22 Prehypertension and the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System310
development in SHR [25]. However, in well-hydrated volunteers and in patients 
with a mild form of essential hypertension, V1R blockade did not alter blood pres-
sure [26, 27]. Thus, the potential contribution of vasopressin to the development of 
hypertension from prehypertension requires further investigations.
22.2.3  Aldosterone
In 1958, Franz Gross postulated a physiological link between the RAS and aldoste-
rone secretion in the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal gland [28]. Later on, several 
groups of investigators confirmed that Ang II stimulates aldosterone secretion [29]. 
Aldosterone, the primary mineralocorticoid, acts via the mineralocorticoid recep-
tors (MR) in the kidneys and plays a central role in the regulation of blood pressure, 
blood volume, and salt household. Importantly, aldosterone contributes to the patho-
genesis of hypertension beyond primary aldosteronism via several pathogenetic 
pathways, e.g., renal sodium and water retention, increased peripheral resistance, 
and stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system [30]. Since aldosterone levels 
within the upper part of the physiological range predispose normotensive subjects 
to the development of hypertension [31], it can be assumed that aldosterone also 
contributes to prehypertension.
The effects of aldosterone on blood pressure regulation extend beyond 
increased intravascular fluid retention and volume overload. Aldosterone modu-
lates vascular tone by upregulation of the AT1R, by limiting bioavailability of 
endothelial NO, by increasing pressor responses to catecholamines, and by 
impairing the vasodilatory response to acetylcholine [32]. In addition, aldosterone 
excess activates inflammation and oxidative stress alters fibrinolysis by increasing 
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 expression [33] and promotes vascular hyper -
trophy followed by increased arterial stiffness [34]. All these cellular pathways, 
regulated by aldosterone via the MR and by Ang II via its AT1R, can reinforce 
each other [35].
In an experimental model of prehypertension in young SHR, treatment with the 
MR antagonist, spironolactone resulted in prolonged blood pressure reduction and 
decreased collagen deposition [36]. Nevertheless, compared to the AT1R antago-
nist, losartan, the transient effect of spironolactone treatment was less impressive.
22.3  “Protective” Arm of the RAS
Recently, attention has been paid to the “protective” arm of RAS [37] that consists 
of several angiotensin peptides and their fragments and receptors with actions at 
least partly opposing the classical RAS concept. Some of these angiotensin pep-
tides, related enzymes, and receptors are of particular interest because they play a 
protective role in the cardiovascular system.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) has been described to be a potent neg-
ative regulator of the RAS, counterbalancing the multiple functions of ACE [38]. 
E. Kaschina and T. Unger311
ACE2 converts the decapeptide, angiotensin I, to angiotensin Ang (1–9), which can 
be further converted by ACE to a shorter peptide, Ang (1–7). Alternatively, Ang 
(1–7) can also be formed directly from Ang I via neutral endopeptidase (NEP, nepri-
lysin). Interestingly, in prehypertensive SHR, the ACE2 levels are reduced [39].
Ang (1–7) evokes a range of acute central and peripheral effects such as vasodi-
latation, inhibition of VSMC proliferation, and inhibition of vasopressin release 
[40]. Although some of these effects depend on the acute activation of eNOS or 
inhibition of NADPH oxidase [41, 42], others may point to a potential role of Ang 
(1–7) in endothelial regeneration [43].
Furthermore, Ang (1–7) is known to be the endogenous ligand for the Mas recep-
tor, a seven-transmembrane domain G-protein-coupled receptor sharing a 31% 
sequence identity with the AT2R [38, 44]. Other studies have suggested that the Mas 
receptor can heterodimerize with AT1R to inhibit the effects of Ang II [45]. A recent 
study shows heterodimerization and close functional relationship of the Mas R and 
the AT2R [4]. Mas receptor activation promotes often opposing effects to those of 
the AT1R such as anti-inflammation, antiproliferation [46], and blood pressure 
reduction as shown in DOCA-salt-induced hypertension in rats [47].
Ang IV (3–8) is formed via the cleavage of Ang III (Ang 2–8) by aminopeptidase 
B or N. Ang IV was reported to activate anti-inflammation and antiproliferation 
through a poorly defined AT4R and to induce vasodilatation and vascular protection 
via eNOS activation and subsequent NO release [48]. In addition, chronic treatment 
with Ang IV improved endothelial dysfunction in ApoE-deficient mice. This vaso-
protective effect most likely resulted from increased NO bioavailability [49].
The angiotensin AT2 receptor (AT2R) is much less expressed under basal condi-
tions compared to the AT1R. However, in cardiovascular diseases, such as hyper -
tension or left ventricular hypertrophy, the AT2R expression is upregulated [3 , 50]. 
The AT2R is a seven-transmembrane domain G-coupled receptor [51] that acts via 
several intracellular signaling pathways such as NO/cGMP activation [52], inhibi-
tion of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) by protein phosphatases [53], 
phospholipase A2 stimulation [54], or disruption of AT1R signaling by AT 1R-AT 2R 
heterodimerization [55]. Similar to the MasR, AT2R activation promotes often 
opposing effects to those of the AT1R such as anti-inflammation, vasodilatation, 
and cell proliferation [1 ]. Activated AT2R also inhibits sympathetic activity [56] 
and through the phosphorylation of MAP kinase counteracts AT1R-mediated 
actions [57]. Notably, the AT2R mediates activation of bradykinin/NO/cGMP sys-
tem in endothelial cells [58], in the heart [59] and in the aorta of prehypertensive 
stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR-SP) [52]. In SHR-SP, the AT2-
mediated increase in aortic cGMP is mediated by bradykinin B2 receptors, which 
activate NO synthase, followed by NO production and formation of the cGMP. 
cGMP, in turn, exerts antihypertensive and tissue protective effects such as vasodi-
latation, natriuresis, and antigrowth [60]. In addition, AT2 knockout mice have 
slightly elevated blood pressure, low basal levels of renal bradykinin and cGMP, as 
well as low NO production [61]. Conversely, AT2 receptor overexpression acti-
vated the vascular kinin system and caused vasodilatation [62]. In humans, the 
AT2-mediated vasorelaxation has been directly demonstrated in isolated coronary 22 Prehypertension and the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System312
artery [63] and gluteal vasculatures [64]. Whereas acute vasodilator role of AT2R 
is well described, chronic decrease of blood pressure seems to be minimal after 
AT2R stimulation [65, 66].
Nevertheless, the AT2R has consistently been shown to be important in the 
prevention of vascular remodeling. In experimental studies performed in prehy-
pertensive rats, AT2R stimulation with a selective AT2R agonist, compound 21 
[67], reduced vascular fibrosis [68] and improved endothelial function and vascu-
lar composition by reducing oxidative stress, collagen content, fibronectin, and 
inflammatory cell infiltration [69]. AT2R stimulation also protected against 
nephropathy in doxorubicin-treated rats [70] and in 2K1C hypertension [71]. 
Furthermore, in a mouse model of type 1 diabetes, AT2R showed microvascular 
vasodilator properties [72].
In addition, AT2R exerts an anti-remodeling effect with regard to atherosclerotic 
lesions [73] and neointimal formation [74]. Iwai and colleague [75] demonstrated 
that AT2R/ApoE-double knockout mice fed a high-cholesterol diet display exagger -
ated atherosclerotic lesion development parallel with increased NADPH oxidase 
activity and superoxide production when compared to ApoE knockout mice. In 
humans, AT2Rs are expressed in the atherosclerotic and aneurysmatic lesions being 
mainly localized in the endothelium of vasa vasorum [76].
Taken collectively, an AT2 receptor-mediated increase in production of vasodila-
tors (nitric oxide, cGMP), as well as the antigrowth and antifibrotic and anti-inflam-
matory features of this receptor, might contribute to blood pressure lowering and 
prevent remodeling in prehypertension.
22.4  Pharmacological Blockade of the RAS 
in Prehypertension
In view of the above-described contribution of the RAS to pathological changes in 
the vasculature and other target organs, given the availability of pharmacological 
inhibitors of this system and stimulated by experimental data in spontaneous 
hypertensive rats [7 , 11, 12], the idea was borne to delay or even prevent the devel-
opment of hypertension in prehypertensive individuals via pharmacological block-
ade of the RAS.
These considerations led to the conception of the so-called TROPHY (Trial of 
Preventing Hypertension) study “Feasibility of treating prehypertension with an 
angiotensin-receptor blocker” by Stevo Julius and colleagues [14]. The aim of this 
clinical trial was to investigate “… whether pharmacological treatment of prehyper -
tension prevents or postpones stage 1 hypertension.”
Participants with systolic blood pressure, between 130 and 139 mmHg and dia-
stolic blood pressures of 89 mmHg or lower, were treated for 2 years with the angio-
tensin AT1 receptor blocker, candesartan, or with placebo followed by placebo for 2 
years for both groups. When a participant became hypertensive (stage 1), he or she 
was continued on candesartan. Advice for “healthy living” to reduce blood pressure 
was given to both groups throughout the study.
E. Kaschina and T. Unger313
Data from 772 participants could be analyzed, roughly half and with respect to 
groups. During the first 2 years, 154 participants reached the endpoint in the placebo 
group, compared to only 53 participants in the candesartan group, corresponding to 
a risk reduction of more than 66%. After 4 years, 240 individuals had developed 
hypertension in the placebo group, compared to 208 in the candesartan group. Thus, 
there was still a significant risk reduction of 16% in the group that had been started 
on candesartan.
The results of this trial demonstrate, first, that prehypertension can indeed be 
considered a precursor of hypertension in a substantial number of individuals 
(nearly two thirds) and, second, that a period of early intervention with an inhibitor 
of the RAS can delay the appearance of hypertension.
While the design of this study appeared relatively straightforward and the results 
on first glance quite clear, TROPHY fueled a lot of discussion and received positive 
as well as negative critiques.
On the negative side, the authors were criticized for using an “odd clinical end-
point” [77]. Without going into too much detail here, this point was answered by the 
authors in a reappraisal of their outcome data using the criteria of the “Joint National 
Committee on Hypertension (JNC)” [78]. There were only very minor differences 
between this analysis and that of the original report.
Even more serious was the criticism that TROPHY did, according to scenarios 
developed by its authors in an interim report [79], not prevent or delay the develop-
ment of hypertension but instead caused a “slow unmasking” of hypertension [77]. 
Indeed, although the endpoints in both groups were still significantly different with 
less incidence of hypertension in the candesartan group, the slope of the cumulative 
incidence curve rose promptly after 2 years when candesartan treatment was 
replaced by placebo. Continuing on their respective slopes, the curves of both 
groups would have probably met after another 2 years or so. Thus, the study did 
indeed not show that hypertension can be prevented by a transient pharmacological 
intervention but that it can be delayed. The authors, although playing with the 
thought of prevention on several occasions, did not make this claim in the abstract 
of their original paper but just mention that “treatment with candesartan reduced the 
risk of incident hypertension during the study period” which is certainly not over-
interpreting the data.
The authors further conclude cautiously that “treatment of prehypertension is fea-
sible.” This statement, too, is justified by the data of their study, but does it make sense, 
clinically? Would it imply that, if taken seriously, 25  million prehypertensive US 
Americans would have to be treated pharmacologically with an inhibitor of the RAS 
notwithstanding the “rest of the world”? Would the usual lifestyle adaptations (weight 
loss, salt restriction, exercise and dietary modifications) as more or less authoritatively 
advocated around the world not have the same effect without “chemistry”?
Kjeldsen et al. [80] argue against this by alluding to the fact that the prevalence 
of prehypertension has increased despite intensive efforts to promote such healthy 
lifestyles [81]. They argue further that, just taking the US American population, of 
the 25 million US Americans with TROPHY-like blood pressures, almost 16 mil-
lion will become hypertensive over the next 4 years according to the experience 22 Prehypertension and the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System314
from the TROPHY placebo group. Should one not intervene as early as possible in 
these individuals given the fact that prehypertension already carries pathological 
abnormalities in cardiovascular structure and function? If one follows this argu-
ment, the question is not any more whether or not it is possible to delay the onset 
of hypertension by transient pharmacological intervention, but to prevent hyperten-
sion altogether by early-onset, continuous treatment in prehypertensive individuals. 
Kjeldsen et al. [80] deliver a strong argument in favor of such early intervention: 
If one uses the absolute difference in risk reduction between groups in TROPHY , 
one can calculate that four individuals with prehypertension need to be treated to 
prevent one case of hypertension in 2 years.
Two years after TROPHY , another clinical study, named PHARAO (Prevention 
of Hypertension with the Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor RAmipril in 
patients with high-nOrmal blood pressure), was published [15].
The objective was quite similar to the one in TROPHY , namely, to address 
“whether the progression to manifest hypertension in patients with high-normal 
blood pressure can be prevented with treatment.” The study included 505 individu-
als in the ramipril and 503 individuals in the placebo group, lasted 3 years and, in 
addition, used ambulatory blood pressure monitoring to confirm the diagnosis of 
hypertension. After 3  years of treatment, 153 individuals in the ramipril group 
(30.7%) and 216 (42.9%) in the placebo group reached the primary endpoint (rela-
tive risk reduction 34.4%; p < 0.0001). Ramipril also reduced the incidence of office 
hypertension in participants with high-normal blood pressure established by ambu-
latory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM). The authors concluded that “treatment 
of patients with high-normal office blood pressure with the angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitor was well tolerated, and significantly reduced the risk of progres-
sion to manifest hypertension.” Analysis of the data further revealed that ramipril 
not only shifted the incidence of manifest hypertension downward in a parallel man-
ner to the placebo group but, in addition, diminished the slope of the graph during 
the treatment period. This was interpreted to mean that the ACE inhibitor not only 
lowered blood pressure per se but also interfered with the vascular or neurohumoral 
factors determining vascular tone.
As with the angiotensin AT1 receptor blocker, candesartan, in TROPHY , it is 
now a member of another class of RAS inhibitors, the ACE inhibitor ramipril, which 
yielded such a preventive antihypertensive effect suggesting that a specific interfer -
ence with the harmful arm of the RAS would reduce the risk toward manifest hyper -
tension. However, in the absence of comparable studies with other classes of 
antihypertensive drugs, this idea, despite its theoretical plausibility, remains 
speculative.
References
 1. Unger T.  The angiotensin type 2 receptor: variations on an enigmatic theme. J Hypertens. 
1999;17(12 Pt 2):1775–86.
 2. Kaschina E, Unger T.  Angiotensin AT1/AT2 receptors: regulation, signalling and function. 
Blood Press. 2003;12:70–88.
E. Kaschina and T. Unger315
 3. Namsolleck P, Recarti C, Foulquier S, Steckelings UM, Unger T. AT(2) receptor and tissue 
injury: therapeutic implications. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2014;16:416.
 4. Leonhardt J, Villela DC, Teichmann A, Münter LM, Mayer MC, Mardahl M, et al. Evidence 
for heterodimerization and functional interaction of the angiotensin type 2 receptor and the 
receptor MAS. Hypertension. 2017;69(6):1128–35.
 5. Peralta CA, Adeney KL, Shlipak MG, Jacobs D Jr, Duprez D, Bluemke D, et al. Structural and 
functional vascular alterations and incident hypertension in normotensive adults: the Multi-
Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. Am J Epidemiol. 2010;171:63–71.
 6. Paul M, Poyan Mehr A, Kreutz R. Physiology of local renin-angiotensin systems. Physiol Rev. 
2006;86(3):747–803.
 7. Harrap SB, Van der Merwe WM, Griffin SA, Macpherson F, Lever AF. Brief angiotensin con-
verting enzyme inhibitor treatment in young spontaneously hypertensive rats reduces blood 
pressure long-term. Hypertension. 1990;16:603–14.
 8. Lundie MJ, Friberg P, Kline RL, Adams MA. Long-term inhibition of the renin-angiotensin 
system in genetic hypertension: analysis of the impact on blood pressure and cardiovascular 
structural changes. J Hypertens. 1997;15:339–48.
 9. Lee RM, Berecek KH, Tsoporis J, McKenzie R, Triggle CR. Prevention of hypertension and 
vascular changes by captopril treatment. Hypertension. 1991;17:141–50.
 10. Unger T, Mattfeldt T, Lamberty V , Bock P, Mall G, Linz W, Schölkens BA, Gohlke P. Effect of 
early onset angiotensin converting enzyme inhibition on myocardial capillaries. Hypertension. 
1992;20:478–82.
 11. Wu JN, Berecek KH. Prevention of genetic hypertension by early treatment of spontaneously 
hypertensive rats with the angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor captopril. Hypertension. 
1993;22:139–46.
 12. Unger T, Rettig R.  Development of genetic hypertension. Is there a “critical phase”? 
Hypertension. 1990;16(6):615.
 13. Schiffrin EL, Deng LY , Larochelle P. Effects of a beta-blocker or a converting enzyme inhibi-
tor on resistance arteries in essential hypertension. Hypertension. 1994;23:83–91.
 14. Julius S, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, Weber MA, Michelson EL, Kaciroti N, et al. Trial of Preventing 
Hypertension (TROPHY) Study Investigators. Feasibility of treating prehypertension with an 
angiotensin-receptor blocker. N Engl J Med. 2006;20(354):1685–97.
 15. Lüders S, Schrader J, Berger J, Unger T, Zidek W, Böhm M, et al. The PHARAO study: pre-
vention of hypertension with the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor ramipril in patients 
with high-normal blood pressure: a prospective, randomized, controlled prevention trial of the 
German Hypertension League. J Hypertens. 2008;26:1487–96.
 16. Balt JC, Mathy MJ, Pfaffendorf M, van Zwieten PA. Sympatho-inhibitory properties of vari-
ous AT1 receptor antagonists. J Hypertens Suppl. 2002;20:S3–11.
 17. Hahn AW, Regenass S, Kern F, Bühler FR, Resink TJ. Expression of soluble and insoluble 
fibronectin in rat aorta: effects of angiotensin II and endothelin-1. Biochem Biophys Res 
Commun. 1993;192:189–97.
 18. Griendling KK, Minieri CA, Ollerenshaw JD, Alexander RW.  Angiotensin II stimulates 
NADH and NADPH oxidase activity in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells. Circ Res. 
1994;74:1141–8.
 19. Zafari AM, Ushio-Fukai M, Akers M, Yin Q, Shah A, Harrison DG, Taylor WR, Griendling 
KK.  Novel role of NADH/NADPH oxidase-derived hydrogen peroxide in angiotensin 
11-induced hypertrophy of rat smooth muscle cells. Hypertension. 1998;32:488–95.
 20. Montezano AC, Touyz RM. Reactive oxygen species, vascular Noxs, and hypertension: focus 
on translational and clinical research. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2014;20:164–82.
 21. Robert Li Y . Free radical biomedicine: principles, clinical correlations, and methodologies: 
Bentham eBooks; 2012. https://doi.org/10.2174/97816080532231120101.
 22. Lacolley P, Regnault V , Nicoletti A, Li Z, Michel JB. The vascular smooth muscle cell in arte-
rial pathology: a cell that can take on multiple roles. Cardiovasc Res. 2012;15(95):194–204.
 23. Culman J, Baulmann J, Blume A, Unger T.  The renin-angiotensin system in the brain: an 
update. J Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone Syst. 2001;2:96–102.22 Prehypertension and the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System316
 24. Burrell LM, Phillips PA, Risvanis J, Aldred KL, Hutchins AM, Johnston CI. Attenuation of 
genetic hypertension after short-term vasopressin V1A receptor antagonism. Hypertension. 
1995;26:828–34.
 25. Burrell LM, Risvanis J, Dean RG, Patel SK, Velkoska E, Johnston CI. Age-dependent regula-
tion of renal vasopressin V(1A) and V 2 receptors in rats with genetic hypertension: implica-
tions for the treatment of hypertension. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2013;7:3–13.
 26. Bussien JP, Waeber B, Nussberger J, Schaller MD, Gavras H, Hofbauer K, et al. Does vasopres-
sin sustain blood pressure of normally hydrated healthy volunteers? Am J Physiol. 1984;246(1 
Pt 2):H143–7.
 27. Waeber B, Nussberger J, Hofbauer KG, Nicod P, Brunner HR. Clinical studies with a vascular 
vasopressin antagonist. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1986;8(Suppl 7):S111–6.
 28. Gross F.  Renin and hypertension, physiological or pathological agents? Klin Wochenschr. 
1958;36:693–706.
 29. Weir MR, Dzau VJ. The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system: a specific target for hyperten-
sion management. Am J Hypertens. 1999;12(12 Pt 3):205–13.
 30. Tomaschitz A, Pilz S, Ritz E, Obermayer-Pietsch B, Pieber TR.  Aldosterone and arterial 
hypertension. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2010;6:83–93.
 31. Vasan RS, Evans JC, Larson MG, Wilson PWF, Meigs JB, Rifai N, et  al. Serum aldoste-
rone and the incidence of hypertension in nonhypertensive persons. N Engl J Med. 2004;351: 
33–41.
 32. Connell JMC, Davies E. The new biology of aldosterone. J Endocrinol. 2005;186(1):1–20.
 33. Schrier RW, Masoumi A, Elhassan E. Aldosterone: role in edematous disorders, hypertension, 
chronic renal failure, and metabolic syndrome. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;5:1132–40.
 34. Briet M, Schiffrin EL.  Treatment of arterial remodeling in essential hypertension. Curr 
Hypertens Rep. 2013;15:3–9.
 35. Lemarié CA, Paradis P, Schiffrin EL. New insights on signaling cascades induced by cross talk 
between angiotensin II and aldosterone. J Mol Med. 2008;86:673–8.
 36. Baumann M, Megens R, Bartholome R, Dolff S, van Zandvoort M, Smits J, Sruijker-Boudier 
HA, De Mey J. Prehypertensive renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockade in spontane-
ously hypertensive rats ameliorates the loss of long-term vascular function. Hypertens Res. 
2007;30:853–61.
 37. Unger T, Steckelings UM, dos Santos RAS, editors. The protective arm of the renin angioten-
sin system—functional aspects and therapeutic implications. 1st ed. London: Academic Press, 
Elsevier; 2015.
 38. Iwai M, Horiuchi M. Devil and angel in the renin-angiotensin system: ACE-angiotensin II AT1 
receptor axis vs. ACE2 angiotensin-(1-7)-Mas receptor axis. Hypertens Res. 2009;32:533–6.
 39. Rentzsch B, Todiras M, Iliescu R, Popova E, Campos LA, Oliveira ML, et  al. Transgenic 
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 overexpression in vessels of SHRSP rats reduces blood pres-
sure and improves endothelial function. Hypertension. 2008;52:967–73.
 40. Santos RA, Ferreira AJ, Verano-Braga T, Bader M.  Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, 
angiotensin-(1–7) and Mas: new players of the renin-angiotensin system. J Endocrinol. 
2013;216:R1–R17.
 41. Sampaio WO, Souza dos Santos RA, Faria-Silva R, da Mata Machado LT, Schiffrin EL, Touyz 
RM. Angiotensin-(1-7) through receptor Mas mediates endothelial nitric oxide synthase acti-
vation via Akt-dependent pathways. Hypertension. 2007;49:185–92.
 42. Bodiga S, Zhong JC, Wang W, Basu R, Lo J, Liu GC, et al. Enhanced susceptibility to bio-
mechanical stress in ACE2 null mice is prevented by loss of the p47(phox) NADPH oxidase 
subunit. Cardiovasc Res. 2011;91:151–61.
 43. Durik M, Sevá Pessôa B, Roks AJ. The renin-angiotensin system, bone marrow and progenitor 
cells. Clin Sci (Lond). 2012;123:205–23.
 44. Santos RA, Simoes e Silva AC, Maric C, Silva DM, Machado RP, de Buhr I, et  al. 
Angiotensin-(1–7) is an endogenous ligand for the G protein-coupled receptor Mas. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2003;100:8258–63.
E. Kaschina and T. Unger317
 45. Kostenis E, Milligan G, Christopoulos A, Sanchez-Ferrer CF, Heringer-Walther S, Sexton PM, 
et al. G-protein-coupled receptor Mas is a physiological antagonist of the angiotensin II type 1 
receptor. Circulation. 2005;111:1806–13.
 46. Villela D, Leonhardt J, Patel N, Joseph J, Kirsch S, Hallberg A, et al. Angiotensin type 2 recep-
tor (AT2R) and receptor Mas: a complex liaison. Clin Sci. 2015;128:227–34.
 47. Singh Y , Singh K, Sharma PL. Effect of combination of renin inhibitor and Mas-receptor ago-
nist in DOCA-salt-induced hypertension in rats. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013;373:189–94.
 48. Patel JM, Martens JR, Li YD, Gelband CH, Raizada MK, Block ER. Angiotensin IV receptor-
mediated activation of lung endothelial NOS is associated with vasorelaxation. Am J Physiol. 
1998;275(6 Pt 1):L1061–8.
 49. Vinh A, Widdop RE, Drummond GR, Gaspari TA. Chronic angiotensin IV treatment reverses 
endothelial dysfunction in ApoE-deficient mice. Cardiovasc Res. 2008;77:178–87.
 50. De Gasparo M, Catt KJ, Inagami T, Wright JW, Unger T. International union of pharmacology. 
XXIII. The angiotensin II receptors. Pharmacol Rev. 2000;52:415–72.
 51. Zhang H, Han GW, Batyuk A, Ishchenko A, White KL, Patel N, et al. Structural basis for 
selectivity and diversity in angiotensin II receptors. Nature. 2017;544:327–32.
 52. Gohlke P, Pees C, Unger T. AT2 receptor stimulation increases aortic cyclic GMP in SHRSP 
by a kinin-dependent mechanism. Hypertension. 1998;31:349–55.
 53. Fischer TA, Singh K, O’Hara DS, Kaye DM, Kelly RA.  Role of AT1 and AT2 receptors 
in regulation of MAPKs and MKP-1 by ANG II in adult cardiac myocytes. Am J Physiol. 
1998;275:H906–16.
 54. Nouet S, Nahmias C.  Signal transduction from the angiotensin II AT2 receptor. Trends 
Endocrinol Metab. 2000;11:1–6.
 55. AbdAlla S, Lother H, Abdel-tawab AM, Quitterer U. The angiotensin II AT2 receptor is an 
AT1 receptor antagonist. J Biol Chem. 2001;276:39721–6.
 56. Gao J, Zhang H, Le KD, Chao J, Gao L. Activation of central angiotensin type 2 receptors 
suppresses norepinephrine excretion and blood pressure in conscious rats. Am J Hypertens. 
2011;24:724–30.
 57. Inagami T, Eguchi S, Numaguchi K, Motley ED, Tang H, Matsumoto T, Yamakawa T. Cross-
talk between angiotensin II receptors and the tyrosine kinases and phosphatases. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 1999;10(Suppl 11):S57–61.
 58. Wiemer G, Schölkens BA, Wagner A, Heitsch H, Linz W. The possible role of angiotensin II 
subtype AT2 receptors in endothelial cells and isolated ischemic rat hearts. J Hypertens Suppl. 
1993;11:S234–5.
 59. Liu YH, Yang XP, Sharov VG, Nass O, Sabbah HN, Peterson E, Carretero OA.  Effects of 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II type 1 receptor antagonists 
in rats with heart failure. Role of kinins and angiotensin II type 2 receptors. J Clin Invest. 
1997;99:1926–35.
 60. Kraehling JR, Sessa WC.  Contemporary approaches to modulating the nitric oxide-cGMP 
pathway in cardiovascular disease. Circ Res. 2017;120:1174–82.
 61. Siragy HM, Inagami T, Ichiki T, Carey RM. Sustained hypersensitivity to angiotensin II and its 
mechanism in mice lacking the subtype-2 (AT2) angiotensin receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 1999;96:6506–10.
 62. Tsutsumi Y , Matsubara H, Masaki H, Kurihara H, Murasawa S, Takai S, et al. Angiotensin II 
type 2 receptor overexpression activates the vascular kinin system and causes vasodilation. J 
Clin Invest. 1999;104:925–93.
 63. Batenburg WW, Garrelds IM, Bernasconi CC, Juillerat-Jeanneret L, van Kats JP, Saxena PR, 
Danser AH. Angiotensin II type 2 receptor-mediated vasodilation in human coronary microar -
teries. Circulation. 2004;109:2296–301.
 64. Savoia C, Touyz RM, V olpe M, Schiffrin EL. Angiotensin type 2 receptor in resistance arteries 
of type 2 diabetic hypertensive patients. Hypertension. 2007;49:341–6.
 65. Widdop RE, Jones ES, Hannan RE, Gaspari TA. Angiotensin AT2 receptors: cardiovascular 
hope or hype? Br J Pharmacol. 2003;140:809–24.22 Prehypertension and the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System318
 66. Steckelings UM, Paulis L, Namsolleck P, Unger T. AT2 receptor agonists: hypertension and 
beyond. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2012;21:142–6.
 67. Wan Y , Wallinder C, Plouffe B, Beaudry H, Mahalingam AK, Wu X, et al. Design, synthesis, 
and biological evaluation of the first selective nonpeptide AT2 receptor agonist. J Med Chem. 
2004;47:5995–6008.
 68. Paulis L, Becker STR, Lucht K, Schwengel K, Slavic S, Kaschina E, et al. Direct angiotensin 
II type 2 receptor stimulation in Nω-nitro-L-arginine-methyl ester-induced hypertension: the 
effect on pulse wave velocity and aortic remodeling. Hypertension. 2012;59:485–92.
 69. Rehman A, Leibowitz A, Yamamoto N, Rautureau Y , Paradis P, Schiffrin EL. Angiotensin type 
2 receptor agonist compound 21 reduces vascular injury and myocardial fibrosis in stroke-
prone spontaneously hypertensive rats. Hypertension. 2012;59(2):291–9.
 70. Hrenák J, Arendášová K, Rajkovičová R, Aziriová S, Repová K, Krajčírovičová K, et  al. 
Protective effect of captopril, olmesartan, melatonin and compound 21 on doxorubicin-
induced nephrotoxicity in rats. Physiol Res. 2013;62(Suppl 1):S181–9.
 71. Matavelli LC, Huang J, Siragy HM. Angiotensin AT 2 receptor stimulation inhibits early renal 
inflammation in renovascular hypertension. Hypertension. 2011;57:308–13.
 72. Begorre MA, Dib A, Habchi K, Guihot AL, Bourreau J, Vessieres E, et al. Microvascular vaso-
dilator properties of the angiotensin 2 receptor in a mouse model of type 1 diabetes. Sci Rep. 
2017;7:45625.
 73. Sales VL, Sukhova GK, Lopez-Ilasaca MA, Libby P, Dzau VJ, Pratt RE. Angiotensin type 
2 receptor is expressed in murine atherosclerotic lesions and modulates lesion evolution. 
Circulation. 2005;112:3328–36.
 74. Nakajima M, Hutchinson HG, Fujinaga M, Hayashida W, Morishita R, Zhang L, et al. The 
angiotensin II type 2 (AT2) receptor antagonizes the growth effects of the AT1 receptor: gain-
of-function study using gene transfer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995;92:10663–7.
 75. Iwai M, Chen R, Li Z, Shiuchi T, Suzuki J, Ide A, et al. Deletion of angiotensin II type 2 recep-
tor exaggerated atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-null mice. Circulation. 2005;112:1636–43.
 76. Kaschina E, Scholz H, Steckelings UM, Sommerfeld M, Kemnitz UR, Artuc M, Schmidt 
S, Unger T. Transition from atherosclerosis to aortic aneurysm in humans coincides with an 
increased expression of RAS components. Atherosclerosis. 2009;205:396–403.
 77. Meltzer JI. A specialist in clinical hypertension critiques the TROPHY trial. Am J Hypertens. 
2006;19:1098–100.
 78. Julius S, Kaciroti N, Egan BM, Nesbitt S, Michelson EL. Trial of Preventing Hypertension 
(TROPHY) Investigators. TROPHY study: outcomes based on the Seventh Report of the 
Joint National Committee on Hypertension definition of hypertension. J Am Soc Hypertens. 
2008;2:39–43.
 79. Julius S, Kjeldsen SE, Weber M, Brunner HR, Ekman S, Hansson L, et al. Outcomes in hyper -
tensive patients at high cardiovascular risk treated with regimens based on valsartan or amlo-
dipine: the V ALUE randomised trial. Lancet. 2004;363(9426):2022–31.
 80. Kjeldsen SE, Narkiewicz K, Hedner T. An American TROPHY in the prevention of hyperten-
sion. Blood Press. 2006;15:132–4.
 81. Qureshi AI, Suri MF, Kirmani JF, Divani AA. Prevalence and trends of prehypertension and 
hypertension in United States: National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys 1976 to 
2000. Mred Sci Monit. 2005;11:CR403–9.
E. Kaschina and T. Unger319 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_23
P. Palatini  
Department of Medicine, University of Padova, Padua, Italy
e-mail: palatini@unipd.it23Tachycardia in Prehypertension
Paolo Palatini
23.1  Introduction
Measurement of resting heart rate is a medical maneuver that dates back to the old 
times when doctors relied on this clinical parameter to assess the health status of 
their patients. However, high heart rate emerged as a cardiovascular risk factor only 
in the modern era when some epidemiologists realized that this clinical variable 
remained included in survival models together with major cardiovascular risk fac-
tors and was a strong independent predictor of cardiovascular events and mortality. 
The first leading study to observe a link between elevated heart rate and develop-
ment of myocardial infarction was the Chicago People Gas Co. study [1] followed 
by the Framingham study [2, 3] and the NHANES study [4]. The association 
appeared particularly strong for sudden death, as shown by the Framingham [2, 3], 
the Paris Prospective Study I [5], and the CASTEL study [6]. In most studies the 
relationship between heart rate and cardiovascular mortality was stronger among 
males than females and was maintained even after excluding individuals who died 
in the first years after baseline evaluation [2, 3, 6]. In the last 20 years, numerous 
new data confirmed those previous findings, and two recent meta-analyses unequiv-
ocally showed that high heart rate is an independent predictor of adverse outcomes 
[7, 8]. Zhang et al. in a meta-analysis of general populations encompassing over 
1 million people showed that for each 10 bpm increase in resting heart rate, there 
was a 9% increase in risk of all-cause mortality [7]. For people with heart rate equal 
to or higher than 80 bpm, there was a 45% increase in risk compared to people with 
heart rate lower than 60 bpm. Similar results were observed for cardiovascular mor -
tality with an 8% increase in risk for each 10 bpm increment in heart rate. More 
recently, in a new meta-analysis on the association between heart rate and risk of 320
cardiovascular events, the same group of investigators confirmed the predictive 
capacity of high heart rate for adverse outcome [8]. Using data from 45 prospective 
cohort studies, these authors found that an increment of 10 bpm in resting heart rate 
implied a 12% (95% confidence interval [CI] 9%–14%) increase in risk for coro-
nary artery disease, a 5% increase (95% CI 1%–8%) for stroke, a 12% increase 
(2%–24%) for sudden death, and a 16% increase (95% CI 12%–21%) in risk for 
non-cardiovascular diseases. All of these relations were linear for either fatal or 
nonfatal events. After excluding studies involving patients with hypertension or dia-
betes, similar results were obtained for coronary artery disease, stroke, and non- 
cardiovascular diseases, while no association was found for sudden death.
23.2  Prehypertension
Prehypertension, e.g., a blood pressure between 120/80 and 139/89 mmHg, affects 
a large number of people in western as well as underdeveloped societies. However, 
this condition is very heterogeneous, and the cardiovascular risk differs in relation 
to many clinical variables, such as age, blood pressure level, and associated risk 
factors. Among these, heart rate emerged as a novel cardiovascular risk factor in 
prehypertension. A large number of general population studies have shown that 
individuals with elevated heart rates also have high blood pressure readings [9 ]. In 
addition, heart rate has been found to be associated with a variety of other risk 
factors including body mass index, metabolic variables, and hematocrit [9 ]. A 
number of studies performed in hypertensive populations have shown that the 
heart rate- mortality association remained significant also when all the above risk 
factors and other possible confounders were included in the survival analyses [7 , 
9]. A large Chinese study has shown that resting heart rate plays an important role 
on the progression to hypertension in subjects with prehypertension [10]. In the 
Kailuan study, participants diagnosed as prehypertensive were selected as the 
observation cohort, and the rate of the progression to hypertension was compared 
among five groups with increasing level of resting heart rate using Cox propor -
tional hazard analysis [10]. A total of 25,392 patients were involved in the final 
statistics after excluding patients who died or were lost to follow-up. Of these, 
13,228 (52.1%) patients developed hypertension during follow-up. The rate of the 
progression to hypertension increased with the resting heart rate being 50.1% in 
the subjects with 70–74 bpm and 57.5% in those with ≥ 85 bpm. Patients in the 
latter group carried 1.25 times higher risk for developing hypertension than 
patients in the former group after adjustment for age, gender, systolic blood pres-
sure, diastolic blood pressure, waist circumference, body mass index, triglyceride, 
total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol, fasting blood glucose, serum uric acid, C-reactive protein, smoking, 
drinking, physical exercise, and family history of hypertension at baseline. This 
longitudinal association has been demonstrated not only for baseline heart rate but 
also for the change in heart rate over time. In the HARVEST study, both baseline 
and follow-up heart rates were potent predictors of subsequent development of 
P. Palatini321
hypertension needing drug therapy [11]. Similarly, in a recent study from China 
[12] over a period of 3.5 years, fast heart rate (>90 bpm) was associated with a 
significantly higher hazard ratio of hypertension.
23.3  Tachycardia and the Cardiovascular Risk 
in Prehypertension and Hypertension
High heart rate is a common feature in patients with hypertension. A large number 
of studies have shown that heart rate is higher in hypertensive than normotensive 
people and that tachycardia is more common in the former. Among the stage 1 
hypertensive subjects participating in the HARVEST study, over 15% had a base-
line resting heart rate ≥85 bpm, and 27% had a heart rate ≥80 bpm (Fig.  23.1) [13]. 
In a large Italian study performed in general practices, over 30% of the hypertensive 
patients had a resting heart rate ≥80 bpm [14].
A positive association between heart rate and adverse outcome has been found 
also in subjects with prehypertension [15]. The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities 
(ARIC) study examined 3275, 45–64-year-old prehypertensive subjects, during a 
mean follow-up of 10.1 years [15]. The primary outcomes were coronary artery 
disease and all-cause mortality. Participants with elevated resting heart rate had 
50% higher all-cause mortality than people with lower resting heart rate (hazard 
ratio [HR] 1.50, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.0–2.15), also after controlling for 
age, ethnicity, gender, diabetes, smoking status, LDL cholesterol, exercise, and use 
of antilipemic agents. In unadjusted analyses, the risk of coronary artery disease 
was 49% higher for people with increased heart rate than in those with normal heart 
rate (HR 1.49, 95% CI 1.03–2.14). In adjusted analyses, elevated resting heart rate 
remained an independent risk of coronary artery disease in women but not in men. 
The authors concluded that resting heart rate is an easily accessible tool that may be 
helpful for stratifying coronary artery disease and mortality risk in people with 
prehypertension.
0510152025
40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120
Heart rate (bpm)Relative frequency (%)27%Fig. 23.1 Distribution of 
resting heart rate measured 
in the lying posture in 
1204, 18–45-year-old 
subjects screened for stage 
1 hypertension from the 
HARVEST study. Data are 
related to baseline 
assessment and are the 
average of six readings 
taken during two 
consecutive visits. Heart 
rate was ≥80 bpm in 27% 
of the participants and was 
≥85 bpm in 15%23 Tachycardia in Prehypertension322
In a cohort of 6100 residents (2600 males and 3500 females) of Kangwha County, 
Korea, 55–99-year-old, the risk of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality was evalu-
ated by resting heart rate and hypertension during a 21-year follow-up [16]. The 
hazard ratios associated with resting heart rate >80 bpm were higher in hyperten-
sives, with hazard ratios of 1.43 (95% CI 1.00–1.92) on all-cause mortality for pre-
hypertension, 3.01 (95% CI 1.07–8.28) on cardiovascular mortality for 
prehypertension, and 8.34 (95% CI 2.52–28.19) for stage 2 hypertension. Increased 
risk (HR 3.54, 95% CI 1.16–9.21) was observed among those with both a resting 
heart rate ≥80 bpm and prehypertension on cardiovascular mortality. Thus, these 
data showed that individuals with coexisting elevated resting heart rate and high 
blood pressure, even in prehypertensive range, have a greater risk for all-cause and 
cardiovascular mortality compared to those with elevated resting heart rate or hyper -
tension alone.
Similar heart rate-risk relationships were found in cohort studies which 
recruited subjects with hypertension [17– 21]. In a cohort of over 5000 patients 
from the Framingham study followed for 36 years, Gillman et al. found that the 
relative risk of cardiovascular death adjusted for age and blood pressure was 1.68 
among men and 1.70 among women for an increase in heart rate of 40 bpm [18]. 
The risks were even greater for all-cause mortality: 2.18 and 2.14, respectively, 
and for sudden death they were 1.93 and 1.37, respectively. These associations 
remained significant also after adjusting for smoking, serum cholesterol, and left 
ventricular hypertrophy. In addition, serial analyses taking account of events that 
occurred within the past 6 years, those which took place in the past 4 years, and 
those which occurred in the past 2 years, confirmed the predictive value of heart 
rate for mortality, making it unlikely that this relationship was due to an underly-
ing illness producing tachycardia. Similar results were obtained by Benetos et al. 
in a cohort of 12,123 men from a French population between the ages of 40 and 
69 [17]. All-cause and cardiovascular mortality steadily increased with higher 
heart rates in both normotensive and hypertensive men. For death from ischemic 
heart disease, the increase in risk was present only among the hypertensive men, 
while the trend, though present, was not significant among the normotensive men. 
In contrast, relationships were weaker and nonsignificant among the women. The 
Glasgow Blood Pressure Clinic study [21] was the first to investigate the effect of 
a combination of baseline and follow-up heart rates on outcomes. Hypertensive 
patients with a heart rate persistently >80 bpm had an increased risk of all-cause 
and cardiovascular mortality. The highest risk of all-cause mortality was found for 
a final heart rate of 81–90  bpm and the lowest risk for a final heart rate of 
61–70 bpm. Within the cohort of the Cooper Clinic study [19], hypertensive indi-
viduals with resting heart rate ≥ 80 bpm were found to be at greater risk for car -
diovascular and all-cause mortality compared with those with hypertension and 
heart rate <60 bpm.
High heart rate proved to be associated with adverse outcomes also in clinical 
trials of hypertensive patients. In the Systolic Hypertension in Europe (Syst-Eur) 
trial [22], elderly patients with HR >79 bpm (top quintile) had a 1.89 greater 
risk of all-cause mortality and a 1.60 greater risk of cardiovascular mortality 
P. Palatini323
than subjects with heart rate below that level. In the hypertensive patients with 
electrocardiographic left ventricular hypertrophy from the LIFE study, a 10 bpm 
increment in heart rate was associated with a 25% increased risk of cardiovas-
cular mortality and a 27% greater risk of all-cause death [23]. Follow-up heart 
rate contributed additional prognostic information because persistence or devel-
opment of a heart rate ≥ 84  bpm was associated with an 89% greater risk of 
cardiovascular death and a 97% increased risk of all-cause mortality. In addition, 
a significant interaction was found between baseline and follow-up heart rate. 
Even more important are the results obtained in the patients with hypertension 
and coronary artery disease from the INternational VErapamil-SR/Trandolapril 
(INVEST) study [24], in which both baseline and follow-up heart rates after 
treatment with cardiac slowing drugs were tested in survival analyses. In that 
study, a 5 bpm increment in baseline resting heart rate was associated with a 6% 
excess risk in the primary composite outcome (all- cause death, nonfatal myo-
cardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke). However, follow- up heart rate after treat-
ment with atenolol or verapamil showed a stronger association with outcome 
and excluded baseline heart rate from the final multivariable model. An inter -
esting finding of the INVEST was that the heart rate-risk relationship was not 
linear, as a tendency to an upturn in risk was observed for the lowest heart rates 
with a nadir at 59 bpm. The heart rate nadir was 64 bpm for people with prior 
myocardial infarction. Thus, this study indicated that in coronary patients opti-
mal heart rate target should be around 60 bpm. New information on the clinical 
importance of high heart rate in hypertension was provided by an analysis of the 
V ALUE study [25], in high-risk hypertensive patients treated with either valsar -
tan- or amlodipine- based therapy. In the V ALUE study, patients were stratified 
according to whether they had high heart rate (top quintile) or lower heart rate 
and whether their blood pressure was controlled or uncontrolled by antihyper -
tensive treatment. As expected, the highest risk was found in the patients with 
elevated heart rate and blood pressure uncontrolled by treatment. However, the 
risk remained high also in the patients whose blood pressure was well controlled 
but heart rate was elevated. A much lower risk was found in the patients with 
blood pressure uncontrolled and a low heart rate and the lowest risk in the group 
with blood pressure well controlled and low heart rate. Thus, this study high-
lighted the important role of tachycardia in hypertension showing that the risk of 
hypertensive patients can be lowered only marginally by antihypertensive treat-
ment if their heart rate remains elevated. Also in the ASCOT- BPLA study [26], 
heart rate measured after 6 weeks was a better predictor of cardiovascular events 
than baseline heart rate. Heart rate predicted all-cause, non-cardiovascular, and 
cardiovascular mortality that occurred during the follow- up, but not nonfatal car -
diovascular events. Finally, an analysis of the ONTARGET and TRANSCEND 
studies showed that the risk of cardiovascular mortality increased by 41%–58% 
among the patients with a heart rate >70 bpm and by 77% in those with heart 
rate >78 bpm [27]. In recent years, the prognostic significance of heart rate has 
also been evaluated in patients with resistant hypertension [28]. In multivari-
able Cox regression, both slow heart rate (<60 bpm for clinic or <55 bpm for 23 Tachycardia in Prehypertension324
nighttime heart rate) and fast heart rate (>75 bpm or >70 bpm, respectively) were 
associated with worse cardiovascular outcomes in comparison with the reference 
group (60–75 bpm), indicating that in resistant hypertension there is a U-shaped 
relationship between heart rate and prognosis [28].
23.4  Ambulatory Versus Clinic Heart Rate
In the abovementioned study by Salles et al., ambulatory heart rates were more 
significant risk markers than office heart rate [28]. Recent research by others 
confirms the results of that study. In the ABP-International study, the authors 
investigated whether heart rate measured with intermittent ambulatory recording 
was a better predictor of cardiovascular events than office heart rate in 7600 
untreated hypertensive patients aged 52 ± 16 years [29]. Data were adjusted for 
several clinical variables including age, gender, blood pressure, smoking, diabe-
tes, serum total cholesterol, and serum creatinine. In a multivariable Cox model, 
nighttime heart rate emerged as the strongest predictor of fatal combined with 
nonfatal events with a hazard ratio of 1.13 (95% CI, 1.04–1.22) for a 10 bpm 
increment of the nighttime heart rate. When subjects taking beta-blockers during 
the follow-up (hazard ratio 1.15; 95% CI, 1.05–1.25) or subjects who had an 
event within 5  years after enrollment (hazard ratio 1.23; 95% CI, 1.05–1.45) 
were excluded from analysis, the association was even stronger. In the ABP-
International study, office heart rate was a weaker predictor of outcome than was 
ambulatory heart rate, and after inclusion of systolic and diastolic blood pres-
sures as covariates in the model, it was no longer a significant predictor of car -
diovascular events. When participants were classified according to the level of 
office and nighttime heart rate, people with masked tachycardia had a higher risk 
of cardiovascular events and mortality than people with normal office and night-
time heart rate (Fig.  23.2) [30]. In contrast, participants with white-coat tachy-
cardia did not show an increase in risk. Results from smaller studies confirm that 
heart rate recorded during sleep is the most accurate predictor of adverse out-
come. In a Japanese general population followed for 12 years, both daytime and 
nighttime heart rates predicted non-cardiovascular disease mortality but not car -
diovascular mortality [31]. However, when nighttime heart rate and day-to- night 
heart rate fall were simultaneously included in the Cox model, only nighttime 
heart rate independently predicted all-cause mortality with a hazard ratio of 1.29 
(95% CI, 1.07–1.54) for a 10 bpm increase in heart rate. In the Syst-Eur study, 
the positive relationship between clinic heart rate and the incidence of fatal end-
points found in the main study was confirmed in the ambulatory monitoring sub-
group, although ambulatory heart rate did not provide prognostic information 
over and above clinic heart rate [22]. In the IDACO study, daytime heart rate did 
not predict mortality, but nighttime heart rate predicted all of the mortality out-
comes (hazard ratios ≥ 1.15). In a study of 457 Japanese hypertensive patients 
followed for 72 months, increased nighttime heart rate and nondipping of heart 
rate were associated with increased risk of cardiovascular and all-cause 
P. Palatini325
mortality, whereas awake heart rate was not [32]. Results obtained with beat-to-
beat Holter recordings are in keeping with the above data. In the Copenhagen 
Holter study [33], average 24 h heart rate, nighttime heart rate, and office heart 
rate were all associated with all- cause mortality. However, after adjusting for 
cardiovascular risk factors, the association with resting heart rate and 24 h heart 
rate disappeared, and only nighttime heart rate remained in the model (hazard 
ratio, 1.17 (95% CI, 1.05–1.30)). In a comparative analysis of differing heart rate 
measurement modalities, resting heart rate measured with 24 h Holter recording 
was found to be marginally superior as a predictor of cardiovascular morbidity 
and mortality during a 17-year follow-up [33]. In multivariate Cox regression 
analyses, hazard ratios were 1.02 (p  = 0.079) for office heart rate, 1.04 (p  = 0.036) 
for average of the lowest 3 hourly heart rates, and 1.03 (p  = 0.093) for mean 
Holter heart rate for each 10 bpm increment [34]. In conclusion, the majority of 
the published studies show that ambulatory heart rate, and nighttime heart rate in 
particular, has a greater prognostic accuracy for cardiovascular and total mortal-
ity than office heart rate. A possible explanation is that heart rate during sleep is 
more representative of the overall hemodynamic load on the arteries and the 
heart than daytime heart rate and can, thus, better reflect cumulative arterial 
injury from mechanical stress on the arterial wall. In addition, persistent increased 
sympathetic activity may be better represented by a high heart rate during sleep 
than by heart rate measured in the office.0,611,41,82,2
Normal
HRsWhite-coat
tachycardiaMasked
tachycardiaSustained
tachycardiaHazard ratio
Fig. 23.2 Risk of cardiovascular events in 7602 hypertensive participants from the ABP- 
International study. Subjects were stratified according to their office and nighttime heart rate (HR). 
For office heart rate, the cutoff between normal and high heart rate was set at 85 bpm. For night-
time heart rate, the cutoff was set at 73 bpm. Using these cutoffs four different groups were identi-
fied: (1) people with normal office and nighttime HRs (N = 5238), (2) white-coat tachycardia (high 
office HR and normal nighttime HR, N = 998), (3) masked tachycardia (normal office HR and high 
nighttime HR, N = 796), and (4) sustained tachycardia (high office and nighttime HRs, N = 570). 
The hazard ratios and corresponding two-sided 95% confidence intervals were derived from the 
regression coefficients in Cox models and were adjusted for age, body mass index, blood pressure, 
serum glucose, and total serum cholesterol and creatinine concentrations, which were fitted as 
continuous variables, and for gender, smoking, alcohol intake, and diabetes, which were fitted as 
categorical variables. Adapted from P. Palatini et al. [30]23 Tachycardia in Prehypertension326
23.5  Pathogenetic Mechanisms
23.5.1  Heart Rate and Physical Fitness
The data from the literature consistently demonstrated that heart rate is a potent 
predictor of mortality and/or cardiovascular disease in prehypertension and hyper -
tension. However, according to some authors, the relationship between high heart 
rate and cardiovascular outcomes might be explained by tachycardia merely reflect-
ing poor physical fitness [35–37]. This issue was investigated in several studies 
which showed that this is unlikely to occur. In the FINRISK Study [38], the effect 
of resting heart rate toward cardiovascular mortality was determined after excluding 
people with preexisting coronary heart disease, angina, and heart failure or on anti-
hypertensive therapy. In women, a positive association was observed with a 32% 
increment in mortality for a 15 bpm increment in heart rate (hazard ratio 1.32, 95% 
CI, 1.08–1.60). In men, each 15 bpm increase in heart rate was associated with an 
adjusted hazard ratio of 1.24 (95% CI, 1.11–1.40). It should be pointed out that in 
this study data were also adjusted for physical activity. Results obtained within the 
frame of the Cooper Clinic study [19] are in keeping with the above data, showing 
a protective role of low resting heart rate on all-cause and cardiovascular disease 
mortality. Patients with a heart rate ≥80 bpm were at greater risk for cardiovascular 
and all-cause mortality compared with those with heart rate <60 bpm irrespective of 
physical fitness. Among the unfit individuals, those with high heart rate had the 
greatest risk of cardiovascular and all-cause mortality, whereas those with low heart 
rate had a similar risk for cardiovascular and all-cause mortality as the fit with high 
heart rate. In the Copenhagen Male Study [39], heart rate was inversely related to 
physical fitness and was associated with mortality in a graded manner also after 
adjusting for physical fitness, leisure-time physical activity, and other cardiovascu-
lar risk factors. In this study, the risk of mortality increased by 16% (95% CI, 
10–22%) per 10  bpm increment in heart rate. In conclusion, the above studies 
showed that elevated heart rate is a risk factor for mortality independent of physical 
fitness or leisure-time physical activity and that heart rate and cardiorespiratory fit-
ness independently contribute to the risk of mortality. The heart rate-adverse out-
come association remained significant after exclusion of people with comorbidities 
and events occurring within the first years of observation, indicating that the tempo-
ral sequence would be compatible with a causal relationship.
23.5.2  Heart Rate and Metabolic Abnormalities
A large number of epidemiologic studies have shown that high heart rate is associ-
ated with obesity and metabolic disturbances such as increased glycemia, total cho-
lesterol, triglycerides, and body mass index [34, 40–42]. Longitudinal studies suggest 
that increased sympathetic tone may be the reason for these associations. Results 
from the HARVEST study have shown that subjects with sympathetic predominance 
at heart rate variability developed hypertension, obesity, and metabolic disturbances 
P. Palatini327
later in life [43, 44]. In a multivariable Cox regression, baseline clinic heart rate 
(P = 0.02) and follow-up changes in clinic heart rate (P  < 0.001) were independent 
predictors of overweight or obesity at the end of a 7-year follow-up. Several cohort 
studies in Japanese individuals also showed that high heart rate is a precursor of 
obesity and metabolic abnormalities [45, 46]. Shigetoh et al. [46] found that indi-
viduals with baseline heart rate ≥ 80 bpm had an increased risk of developing obesity, 
abdominal obesity, metabolic syndrome, and diabetes 20  years later compared to 
people with heart rate <60 bpm. The adjusted risk was 2.34 (95% CI, 1.09–5.90) for 
obesity and 5.39 (95% CI, 1.34–21.8) for diabetes. A recent analysis in healthy sub-
jects from the Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety (NESDA) showed that 
several measures of sympathetic activity were predictors of the metabolic syndrome 
during a 2-year follow-up [47]. In the Chicago Heart Association Detection Project 
in Industry [48], the adjusted odds of having diabetes after 65 years of age was 1.10 
(95% CI, 1.05–1.16) per 12 bpm higher baseline heart rate. In this study, higher heart 
rate was also associated with diabetes mortality (odds ratio 1.21; 95% CI, 1.03–
1.41). A large Japanese study in apparently healthy men and women aged 30–59 years 
confirmed those findings [49]. In this study, the adverse effects of fast heart rate and 
high blood pressure were independent of each other as well as of the influences of 
major risk factors. In the Australian Diabetes, Obesity, and Lifestyle study [50], par -
ticipants with a heart rate ≥80 bpm were more likely to develop diabetes (odds ratio 
1.89; 95% CI, 1.07–3.35) compared with participants with a heart rate <60 bpm. The 
association between baseline heart rate and future diabetes was also found in a pro-
spective cohort study of patients with clinically manifest vascular diseases from the 
SMART study [51]. Every 10 bpm increase in heart rate increased the risk for type 2 
diabetes (hazard ratio 1.10; 95% CI, 1.00–1.21). The risk was independent of the 
type of vascular disease or beta-blocker use. The relationship between resting heart 
rate and metabolic syndrome was also investigated in a large Chinese cohort from 
Kailuan/Tangshan in a 4-year follow-up [52]. The metabolic syndrome was cross-
sectionally associated to resting heart rate with an odds ratio of 1.49 (95% CI, 1.32–
1.69) in subjects with heart rate at 95–104 bpm compared with those at 55–64 bpm, 
after adjusting for confounders and risk factors. In addition, the longitudinal analysis 
in the participants without metabolic syndrome at baseline showed that heart rate 
was predictive of the risk of developing the metabolic syndrome 4 years later with a 
hazard ratio of 1.42 (1.23–1.62) for the top heart rate group compared to the bottom 
group. Whether a dose-response relationship exists between heart rate and the meta-
bolic syndrome is unclear. This issue was addressed by a recent meta-analysis which 
used restricted cubic spline function to assess the dose-response relationship [53]. 
Seven prospective cohort studies and 10 cross-sectional studies with a total of 
169,786 participants were included. The pooled relative risk was 2.10 (95% CI 1.80–
2.46) for the highest versus reference heart rate category and 1.28 (95% CI 1.23–
1.34) for each 10 bpm increment in heart rate. In this study, no evidence was found 
for a nonlinear dose-response association between heart rate and metabolic syndrome 
(P = 0.20). In conclusion, the above studies demonstrate that high heart rate is a pre-
cursor of obesity and metabolic abnormalities and suggest that resting heart rate has 
a potential for screening subjects at high risk of undiagnosed diabetes.23 Tachycardia in Prehypertension328
23.5.3  Role of Autonomic Nervous System in Prehypertension
Why some individuals have a faster resting heart rate than others still remains poorly 
understood. This is unlikely to be due to an inherently faster cardiac pacemaker, as 
demonstrated in leading pharmacological studies by Julius et al. [54, 55]. Using 
intravenous injections of propranolol to block β receptors and atropine to block 
parasympathetic receptors in a group of healthy volunteers, these authors showed 
that intrinsic heart rate after blockade was 110  bpm in younger and gradually 
decreased to about 85 in older individuals [54]. Intrinsic heart rate was measured 
also in patients with hyperkinetic prehypertension and a group of normotensive 
subjects of control. In the prehypertensive group, the heart rate remained higher 
than in the normotensive controls after the β blockade, and addition of parasympa-
thetic blockade with atropine increased heart rate to the same level in the two 
groups. This experiment showed that tachycardia in prehypertension was due to a 
different autonomic nervous control of a normal pacemaker. In prehypertensive sub-
jects there was a larger decrease of heart rate after β-blocker administration, and the 
parasympathetic blockade elicited a smaller increase of heart rate. This indicates 
that patients with prehypertension have an increased sympathetic and a decreased 
vagal tone. Tachycardia and sympathetic overactivity are closely intertwined in pre-
hypertension, and both components play an important role in the development of 
hypertension and cardiovascular disease. Indeed, a body of evidence suggests that 
fast heart rate is a reliable marker of increased sympathetic activity both in the gen-
eral population and in hypertensive patients. In the HARVEST study, people with 
clinical signs of sympathetic predominance at spectral analysis of heart rate vari-
ability had a much higher heart rate than people with normal autonomic nervous 
system tone (Fig.  23.3) [43]. This association was confirmed by Grassi et al., who 
measured heart rate, plasma catecholamines, and muscle sympathetic nerve activity 
in four groups of subjects with different clinical characteristics: (1) healthy volun-
teers (controls), (2) hypertensive patients, (3) obese individuals, and (4) patients 
with heart failure [56]. In the overall population, a significant correlation of heart 
rate was found with both markers of sympathetic activity indicating that high heart 
rate reflects increased sympathetic tone. Hypertension is accompanied not only by 
increased sympathetic tone but also by reduced parasympathetic activity. In the 
HARVEST study, young subjects with sympathetic predominance had both an 
increase in the low-frequency component (mainly marker of sympathetic activity) 
and the high-frequency component (mainly marker of vagal activity) at spectral 
analysis of heart rate variability (Fig.  23.3) [43]. A reduced vagal tone in hyperten-
sion has also been shown by pharmacological studies [57].
23.5.4  Effect of High Heart Rate on Vascular Wall 
and Target Organs
Hypertension if left untreated is a self-accelerating condition. In prehypertensive 
subjects the acceleration is usually slow and nearly linear, but when hypertension 
P. Palatini329
develops the increase of blood pressure is faster and even becomes exponential due 
to the blood pressure-induced restructuring of the arterioles. Arteriolar wall thick-
ens because of smooth muscle hypertrophy and arteriolar remodeling with conse-
quent increase of vascular resistance. In addition, high heart rate exposes the arteries 
to turbulent blood flow chiefly at points where vessels bifurcate [34, 58]. The low 
shear stress and the increased tensile stress generated by tachycardia favor the 
development of atherosclerotic plaques and increase the stiffness of large blood ves-
sels [40–42].
The effect of tachycardia on coronary arteries was examined in several studies of 
cynomolgus monkeys consuming an atherogenic diet [59–63]. Evidence that heart 
rate lowering might retard coronary atherogenesis was provided by Beere et al. [59] 
in an elegant experimental study. After ablation of the sinoatrial node in a group of 
monkeys on atherogenic diet, the heart rate was reduced by about 30%. Monkeys 
with lowered heart rate were compared with a group whose heart rate was left 
unchanged. After 6 months of atherogenic diet, the animals were sacrificed, and 
those in the lower heart rate group had a significantly lower area of coronary 2030405060708090
SP NANS Normot
Mental challengeLow Frequency
Resting 2030405060708090
SP NANS Normot
High Frequency% %
Fig. 23.3 Frequency-domain indexes of heart rate variability in two groups of young-to-middle- 
age stage 1 hypertensive subjects and a group of normotensive controls (Normot). Group 1, sub-
jects with sympathetic predominance (SP). Group 2, subjects with normal autonomic nervous 
system activity (NANS). Power spectral densities were computed from 512-s periods by the maxi-
mum entropy method using an autoregressive model. Low-frequency power (LF, 0.04–0.15 Hz) 
and high-frequency power (HF, 0.15–0.40  Hz) are expressed as percent of total power (0.04–
0.40  Hz). Parameters of heart rate variability were recorded in resting conditions and during 
Stroop’s color mental test, a computerized conflict-evoking test. For both data obtained at rest and 
during the mental challenge, there was a progressive decrease of the low-frequency component 
from the hypertensive subjects with SP to the normotensive subjects of control and a progressive 
increase in the high-frequency component. Mean ± SEM resting heart rate was 79.1 ± 1.7 bpm in 
Group 1 and was 67.8 ± 0.9 in Group 2, p < 0.001. Adapted from P. Palatini et al. [43]23 Tachycardia in Prehypertension330
atherosclerosis and percentage of stenosis than the group of control. Along the same 
line of research, Kaplan et al. [60, 61] focused on effect of behavior on coronary 
atherosclerosis of cynomolgus monkeys and found that aggressive dominant ani-
mals developed extensive coronary atherosclerosis. In a second experiment, Kaplan 
et  al. [62] investigated whether treatment with beta-blockers would prevent the 
increase in coronary lesions in dominant animals. They found that treatment with 
propranolol actually decreased coronary plaque area only in dominant animals. The 
pathogenetic role of high heart rate was confirmed by Bassiouny et al. who found a 
correlation between stress index and the thickness of major atherosclerotic lesions 
in the infrarenal aorta and iliac arteries in male Cynomolgus monkeys [63]. Thus, 
these animal studies demonstrated that increased heart rate can damage the blood 
vessels and that heart rate lowering can prevent the atherosclerotic lesions.
More recently, also a study in human beings confirmed those experimental data 
[64]. In a pooled analysis of four intracoronary ultrasound clinical trials, the vol-
ume of coronary atheroma was measured before and after treatment with antihy-
pertensive drugs [64]. In this study, about three quarters of patients were treated 
with beta- blockers and one quarter with other drugs. Treatment with beta-blockers 
decreased the volume of coronary atheroma to a larger extent than the other treat-
ments did showing that heart rate reduction can actually reduce coronary athero-
sclerotic lesions.
Other studies in human beings confirmed the deleterious effects of tachycardia 
on the coronary arteries. An association between resting heart rate and progression 
of focal coronary atherosclerosis was described by Huikuri et al. in patients with 
prior coronary artery bypass surgery [65]. Minimum heart rate measured during 
24 h recording was correlated to global severity and rate of progression of coronary 
atherosclerotic lesions in subjects with myocardial infarction [66].
High heart rate can cause arterial wall lesions and target organ damage also 
through an increase in arterial stiffness. Heart rate increase with atrial pacing in rats 
has been shown to produce progressive reduction in carotid distensibility [67]. The 
same effect was observed in sympathectomized animals suggesting that the increase 
in heart rate rather than an underlying hyperactivity of the sympathetic nervous 
system was the responsible factor. The heart rate-arterial stiffness relationship was 
also shown in human studies which used pulse wave velocity as a marker of stiff-
ness. Albaladejo et al. [68] found a positive correlation between pulse wave velocity 
and 24 h ambulatory heart rate in subjects with hypertension. In a large multicenter 
population of normotensive and hypertensive individuals in France, Sa Cunha et al. 
[69] measured pulse wave velocity and degree of vascular distention at multiple 
vascular sites. There was a significant correlation of high heart rate with arterial 
rigidity in the thoracic aorta and lower limbs. The results of studies in which the 
effect of heart rate manipulation with pacing on pulse wave velocity was evaluated 
are consistent with the above data. A French [70] and an Australian [71] study 
showed a progressive increase in carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity with increas-
ing level of heart rate. This effect was independent from the effect of pacing on 
blood pressure. Also temporal changes in heart rate have been found to be predictive 
of large artery stiffness [72]. This was shown by Tomiyama et al. in 1795 apparently 
P. Palatini331
healthy Japanese subjects (mean age 39 years) in whom heart rate was measured at 
baseline and also during a 5–6-year follow-up [72]. The authors found that both 
heart rate at the baseline examination and changes in heart rate during the follow-up 
period were significantly associated with the corresponding changes in pulse wave 
velocity even after adjusting for a variety of atherogenic risk factors. These data 
suggest a synergistic role of high baseline heart rate and of the increase in heart rate 
during the follow-up in accelerating age-associated increases in arterial stiffness. 
The stiffening effect of high heart rate on the large arteries is likely to be due to the 
reduced length of the cardiac cycle associated with tachycardia that does not allow 
the viscoelastic arterial wall enough time to distend fully [58, 67]. As mentioned 
above, in addition to low shear stress, each cardiac beat imposes a blood pressure- 
related tensile stress on the vascular wall. Repeated mechanical load increases the 
viscosity of the arterial wall which in turn increases the vascular stiffness [67].
There is no doubt that increased vascular stiffness has deleterious effects on the 
cardiovascular system. This relationship was shown by Laurent et al. [73] in 1980 
patients with hypertension followed for an average of 9.3 years. Pulse wave velocity 
was significantly associated with both all-cause and cardiovascular mortality also in 
a model adjusted for confounders and risk factors. Similar results were obtained by 
Willum-Hansen et al. [74] who studied the incidence of fatal and nonfatal cardio-
vascular endpoints, cardiovascular deaths, and fatal or nonfatal coronary heart dis-
ease in a Danish general population followed for 9.4 years. After adjustment for 
numerous confounders including blood pressure, the pulse wave velocity remained 
a significant predictor of all endpoints. In a recent meta-analysis [75] of 16 studies 
involving 17,635 subjects, aortic pulse wave velocity was a highly significant pre-
dictor of strokes, coronary artery disease, and all cardiovascular events.
In summary, a body of evidence indicates that increased heart rate exposes the 
arteries to a larger cumulative stress during the lifetime. The tensile stress induces 
vascular stiffness, and the low shear stress favors the development of atherosclerotic 
plaques. As a consequence, people with tachycardia are bound to develop premature 
and widespread vascular damage.
Not only does elevated heart rate promote development of atherosclerotic plaques 
and large artery stiffness but it also has a pathogenetic role in precipitating cardio-
vascular events. This was shown by Heidland and Strauer in a group of patients who 
underwent two coronary angiograms within 6 months [76]. These authors demon-
strated that the hemodynamic stress related to increased heart rate may play a cru-
cial role in coronary plaque disruption [76]. Indeed, after 6 months of follow-up, 
plaque disruption resulted more common among people with heart rate >80 bpm 
than in those with lower heart rate. Plaque disruption could be prevented in those 
subjects who had been administered beta-blockers.
The high sympathetic tone and reduced parasympathetic tone underlying tachy-
cardia can decrease the threshold of ventricular arrhythmias, as demonstrated by 
Lown and Verrier in dogs with manipulation of autonomic nervous system activity 
[77]. When sympathetic tone was increased in dogs, the threshold for ventricular 
fibrillation was reduced, an effect that was abolished by simultaneous vagal stimula-
tion. This mechanism likely accounts for the strong relationship between 23 Tachycardia in Prehypertension332
tachycardia and sudden death found in many epidemiologic studies [78, 79]. An 
elevated heart rate may facilitate desynchronization of ventricular muscle cells, 
especially in an ischemic myocardium, increasing oxygen consumption and wors-
ening coronary perfusion [34].
23.6  Should High Heart Rate Be Reduced 
in Prehypertension?
As mentioned above, elevated heart rate is a common feature in patients with prehy-
pertension and hypertension. Among the young hypertensive subjects participating 
in the HARVEST study, about one third showed clinical signs of sympathetic pre-
dominance at spectral analysis of heart rate variability and increased heart rate [43], 
a finding consistent with the results obtained in the Tecumseh Study [80]. In the 
long run, this hemodynamic stress together with the excessive blood pressure load 
can cause target organ damage. Decreasing blood pressure and heart rate at this 
point can still reduce the incidence of cardiovascular events, but the underlying 
atherosclerosis and renal dysfunction will not be reverted. Thus a treatment 
addressed to prevent target organ damage should be started earlier. As pointed out 
in a recent document of the European Society of Hypertension, making practical 
therapeutic suggestions for the hypertensive patients with high heart rate is difficult 
because of lack of data from clinical trials [81]. In young people with autonomic 
dysfunction characterized by sympathetic predominance, rather than to merely 
reduce elevated heart rate and high blood pressure, it would be more rationale to try 
to restore a normal sympatho-vagal balance. This goal can be achieved by improv-
ing subjects’ lifestyle.
23.6.1  Lifestyle Measures
Smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, and heavy coffee use increase the sym-
pathetic tone with consequent effects on resting heart rate and blood pressure [34, 
82, 83]. Thus improving an unhealthy lifestyle would decrease both these hemody-
namic variables. This should be the first goal of a clinician in the management of 
the hypertensive patient with tachycardia. A dietary intervention addressed to 
reduce calorie intake in overweight people would improve the tone of the auto-
nomic nervous system and reduce blood pressure and heart rate [84]. Beneficial 
effects have been shown also by increased consumption of omega-3 fatty acids 
found in fatty fish and fish oil. Several studies have shown that omega-3 fatty acids 
may improve parameters of autonomic function including heart rate variability and 
baroreflex sensitivity [85, 86]. Indeed, omega-3 fatty acids have been reported to 
cause some beneficial effects on resting heart rate with decreases in the range of 
2–4 bpm [85– 87].
Besides reducing the consumption of tobacco, alcohol, and caffeinated bever -
ages, a program of regular physical activity should be implemented. Several 
P. Palatini333
non- pharmacological interventions have been advocated in people with prehyper -
tension or hypertension such as behavioral therapies (transcendental meditation, 
other meditation forms, biofeedback, yoga, and other relaxation methods) or non-
invasive procedures or devices (acupuncture, device-guided breathing). However, 
according to a working group of the American Heart Association [88], existing 
evidence about blood pressure and heart rate lowering exists only for exercise-
based regimens. Several studies have shown that dynamic aerobic exercise, 
dynamic resistance exercise, and even isometric exercise have beneficial effects on 
blood pressure in hypertension and prehypertension [89, 90]. Regular endurance 
exercise, in particular, causes a reduction of the sympathetic activity and an 
increase of vagal tone with a marked reduction in resting heart rate [91– 94]. 
Comparative studies performed with 24 h continuous recording have shown that 
physically active persons have a ~10 bpm lower heart rate compared to sedentary 
controls [91]. This effect is comparable to that of beta-blockers. In a study by 
Meredith et  al. [95], hemodynamic changes were associated with a noticeable 
decrease of sympathetic tone; total norepinephrine spillover to plasma fell by 24%, 
and the renal norepinephrine spillover decreased by 41%. The antiadrenergic effect 
of aerobic exercise can explain the effect of regular physical activity on the heart 
in hypertensive subjects. In a study by Jennings et  al., the left ventricular wall 
thickness decreased by 5.7%, whereas the left ventricle cavity slightly increased 
[89]. The wall thickness/cavity radius ratio significantly decreased in the exercise 
group. Several other clinical studies conducted in hypertensive patients have docu-
mented a reduction in left ventricular mass and wall thickness after a period of 
endurance exercise [90]. In the HARVEST study, only 1.7% of the active subjects 
developed left ventricular hypertrophy during an 8-year follow-up versus 10.3% 
among the sedentary controls with an adjusted OR of 0.24 (95% CI, 0.07–0.85) 
[96]. In addition, exercise has a favorable impact on all factors of the insulin resis-
tance syndrome: blood pressure, plasma lipids, serum insulin, and overweight [84, 
97]. Regular physical activity has also been found to be associated with a reduction 
of cardiovascular responsiveness to psychophysiological stressors [98]. In a group 
of young- to middle-age subjects with stage 1 hypertension, subjects who per -
formed regular physical activity had a smaller blood pressure and heart rate reac-
tion to a psychological stressor and a lower blood pressure increase over time than 
sedentary subjects [98]. Central autonomic adaptations in response to exercise are 
likely to be responsible for the reduced hemodynamic responsiveness to psycho-
logical stress and might represent a mechanistic pathway for the decreased ten-
dency to develop hypertension in physically active subjects [99]. Thus, adoption of 
a healthy lifestyle could revert to normal mild elevations of heart rate and blood 
pressure in young people with hyperkinetic circulation avoiding the use of pharma-
cological therapy. Exercise thus appears as an important tool for attenuating the 
negative effect of sympathetic predominance especially in people exposed to high 
environmental stress. A low-to-moderate exercise intensity program seems to be 
sufficient for reducing blood pressure in the majority of patients [100]. However, 
the reduction of heart rate and the favorable metabolic effects of physical training 
seem to be proportional to the intensity of exercise. For this reason the American 23 Tachycardia in Prehypertension334
College of Sports Medicine recommends that moderate-to-vigorous activities 
should be practiced by most healthy individuals [100]. However, low- intensity 
exercise may be a safer option for many hypertensive patients chiefly for those 
with a high cardiovascular risk profile.
23.6.2  Pharmacological Treatment
If non-pharmacological measures fail to achieve the desired goal and heart rate 
remains elevated, a drug treatment addressed to reduce the high heart rate might be 
considered in hypertensive patients. Unfortunately, the lack of randomized clinical 
trials on the treatment of high heart rate and the absence of specific recommenda-
tions from international guidelines do not allow the clinician to make decisions 
based on evidence. Another controversial point is the heart rate level that should be 
used to define tachycardia because the relationship between heart rate and the level 
of cardiovascular risk in general populations is a continuous one. It follows that the 
partition level between normal and abnormal values has to be defined according to 
arbitrary criteria. In most epidemiological studies, a significant increase in risk was 
found for a heart rate ≥80 bpm [101]. It is therefore obvious that the definition of 
tachycardia as a heart rate greater than 100 bpm is no longer acceptable for risk 
stratification. According to some investigators, the upper normal limit for resting 
heart rate should be the level at which the benefits of treatment outweigh the risks 
[101]. Unfortunately, no clinical trial has been implemented as yet in hypertension 
to study the effects of cardiac slowing drugs on morbidity and mortality. 
Retrospective analyses of patients with myocardial infarction or congestive heart 
failure have shown that beta-blockers or other bradycardic agents are effective in 
reducing mortality only in subjects with a high baseline heart rate [102]. Carvedilol 
has been reported to cause a marked reduction in mortality only in patients with a 
heart rate >82 bpm [103]. More recent data obtained with the I/f channel antagonist 
ivabradine indicate that the beneficial effect of this drug can be obtained in patients 
with heart rate higher than 70 bpm [104, 105]. However, it should be noted that in 
those studies ivabradine was given on top of beta-blockers, and thus the original 
heart rate of the patients before treatment was likely to be 10 bpm higher. In sum-
mary, the data obtained in epidemiologic studies in general populations and in clini-
cal trials of patients with myocardial infarction or congestive heart failure suggest 
that the threshold level between normal and high heart rate should be set in the 
range of 80–85 bpm.
With these caveats in mind, we suggest that cardiac slowing treatment should be 
considered in hypertensive subjects with high heart rate. As pointed out by a recent 
document of the European Society of Hypertension, absence of evidence does not 
mean evidence against the importance of tachycardia as a risk factor for cardiovas-
cular disease [81]. Lifelong exposure to a potentially important risk factor may 
cause earlier target organ damage and impair the patient’s prognosis. Thus, some 
degree of flexibility with management is expected, and decisions should be made 
according to the clinical characteristics of the patient and the level of high heart rate. 
P. Palatini335
For these reasons the panel of experts suggested that in some hypertensive patients 
with tachycardia, especially if they are symptomatic, treatment by available drugs, 
mostly beta-1 selective beta-blockers, can be considered [81].
References
 1. Dyer AR, Persky V , Stamler J, et  al. Heart rate as a prognostic factor for coronary heart 
disease and mortality: findings in three Chicago epidemiological studies. Am J Epidemiol. 
1980;112:736–49.
 2. Kannel WB, Wilson P, Blair SN. Epidemiological assessment of the role of physical activity 
and fitness in development of cardiovascular disease. Am Heart J. 1985;109:876–85.
 3. Kannel WB, Kannel C, Paffenbarger RS Jr, et al. Heart rate and cardiovascular mortality: the 
Framingham study. Am Heart J. 1987;113:1489–94.
 4. Gillum RF, Makuc DM, Feldman JJ.  Pulse rate, coronary heart disease, and death: the 
NHANES I epidemiological follow-up study. Am Heart J. 1991;121:172–7.
 5. Jouven X, Desnos M, Guerot C, et al. Predicting sudden death in the population: the Paris 
prospective study 1. Circulation. 1999;99:1978–83.
 6. Palatini P, Casiglia S, Julius S, et al. Heart rate, a risk factor for cardiovascular mortality in 
elderly men. Arch Intern Med. 1999;159:585–92.
 7. Zhang D, Shen X, Qi X. Resting heart rate and all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in the 
general population: a meta-analysis. CMAJ. 2016;188:E53–63.
 8. Zhang D, Wang W, Li F.  Association between resting heart rate and coronary artery dis-
ease, stroke, sudden death and noncardiovascular diseases: a meta-analysis. CMAJ. 
2016;188:E384–E92.
 9. Palatini P, Julius S.  Review article: “Heart rate and the cardiovascular risk”. J Hypertens. 
1997;15:3–17.
 10. Ji C, Zheng X, Chen S, et al. Impact of resting heart rate on the progression to hypertension in 
prehypertension patients. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi. 2014;42:860–5.
 11. Palatini P, Dorigatti F, Zaetta V , et al. Heart rate as a predictor of development of sustained 
hypertension in subjects screened for stage 1 hypertension: the HARVEST Study. J Hypertens. 
2006;24:1873–80.
 12. Wang A, Liu X, Guo X, et al. Resting heart rate and risk of hypertension: results of the Kailuan 
cohort study. J Hypertens. 2014;32:1600–5.
 13. Palatini P, Casiglia E, Pauletto P, et al. Relationship of tachycardia with high blood pressure and 
metabolic abnormalities. A Study with mixture analysis in three populations. Hypertension. 
1997;30:1267–73.
 14. Farinaro E, Stranges S, Guglielmucci G, et al. Heart rate as a risk factor in hypertensive indi-
viduals. The Italian tensiopulse study. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 1999;9:196–202.
 15. King DE, Everett CJ, Mainous AG, et al. Long-term prognostic value of resting heart rate in 
subjects with prehypertension. Am J Hypertens. 2006;19:796–800.
 16. Ryu M, Bayasgalan G, Kimm H, et al. Association of resting heart rate and hypertension stages 
on all-cause and cardiovascular mortality among elderly Koreans: the Kangwha cohort study. J 
Geriatr Cardiol. 2016;13:573–9.
 17. Benetos A, Rudnichi A, Thomas F, et al. Influence of heart rate on mortality in a French popu-
lation. Role of age, gender, and blood pressure. Hypertension. 1999;33:44–52.
 18. Gillman MW, Kannel WB, Belanger A, D’Agostino RB. Influence of heart rate on mortality 
among persons with hypertension: the Framingham study. Am Heart J. 1993;125:1148–54.
 19. Saxena A, Minton D, Lee DC, et al. Protective role of resting heart rate on all-cause and car -
diovascular disease mortality. Mayo Clin Proc. 2013;88:1420–6.
 20. Thomas F, Bean K, Provost JC, et al. Combined effects of pulse pressure and heart rate on 
cardiovascular mortality. J Hypertens. 2001;19:863–9.23 Tachycardia in Prehypertension336
 21. Paul L, Hastie CE, Li WS, et al. Resting heart rate pattern during follow-up and mortality in 
hypertensive patients. Hypertension. 2010;55:567–74.
 22. Palatini P, Thijs L, Staessen JA, et  al. Predictive value of clinic and ambulatory heart rate 
for mortality in elderly subjects with systolic hypertension. Arch Intern Med. 2002;162: 
2313–21.
 23. Okin PM, Kjeldsen SE, Julius S, et al. All-cause and cardiovascular mortality in relation to 
changing heart rate during treatment of hypertensive patients with electrocardiographic left 
ventricular hypertrophy. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:2271–9.
 24. Kolloch R, Legler UF, Champion A, et al. Impact of resting heart rate on outcomes in hyper -
tensive patients with coronary artery disease: findings from the INternational VErapamil-SR/
trandolapril STudy (INVEST). Eur Heart J. 2008;29:1327–34.
 25. Julius S, Palatini P, Kjeldsen S, et  al. Usefulness of heart rate to predict cardiac events in 
treated patients with high-risk systemic hypertension. Am J Cardiol. 2012;109:685–92.
 26. Poulter NR, Dobson JE, Sever PS, et al. ASCOT Investigators. Baseline heart rate, antihyper -
tensive treatment, and prevention of cardiovascular outcomes in ASCOT (Anglo- Scandinavian 
Cardiac Outcomes Trial). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:1154–61.
 27. Böhm M, Schumacher H, Schmieder RE, et al. Resting heart rate is associated with renal dis-
ease outcomes in patients with vascular disease: results of the ONTARGET and TRANSCEND 
studies. J Intern Med. 2015;278:38–49.
 28. Salles GF, Cardoso CR, Fonseca LL, et al. Prognostic significance of baseline heart rate and 
its interaction with beta-blocker use in resistant hypertension: a cohort study. Am J Hypertens. 
2013;26:218–26.
 29. Palatini P, Reboldi G, Beilin LJ, et al. Predictive value of night-time heart rate for cardiovas-
cular events in hypertension. The ABP-International study. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:1490–5.
 30. Palatini P, Reboldi G, Beilin LJ, et al. Masked tachycardia. A predictor of adverse out come in 
Hypertension. J Hypertens. 2017;35:487–92.
 31. Hozawa A, Inoue R, Ohkubo T, et al. Predictive value of ambulatory heart rate in the Japanese 
general population: the Ohasama study. J Hypertens. 2008;26:1571–6.
 32. Hansen TW, Thijs L, Boggia J, et al. Prognostic value of ambulatory heart rate revisited in 
6928 subjects from 6 populations. Hypertension. 2008;52:229–35.
 33. Johansen CD, Olsen RH, Pedersen LR, et al. Resting, night-time, and 24 h heart rate as mark-
ers of cardiovascular risk in middle-aged and elderly men and women with no apparent heart 
disease. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:1732–9.
 34. Carlson N, Dixen U, Marott JL, et al. Predictive value of casual ECG-based resting heart rate 
compared with resting heart rate obtained from Holter recording. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 
2014;74:163–9.
 35. Palatini P, Julius S. Association of tachycardia with morbidity and mortality: pathophysiologi-
cal considerations. J Hum Hypertens. 1997;11(S 1):19–27.
 36. Menotti A, Mulder I, Nissinen A, et  al. Cardiovascular risk factors and 10-year all-cause 
mortality in elderly European male populations; the FINE study. Finland, Italy, Netherlands, 
Elderly. Eur Heart J. 2001;22:573–9.
 37. Floyd JS, Sitlani CM, Wiggins KL, et al. Variation in resting heart rate over 4 years and the 
risks of myocardial infarction and death among older adults. Heart. 2015;101:132–8.
 38. Cooney MT, Vartiainen E, Laatikainen T, et al. Elevated resting heart rate is an independent 
risk factor for cardiovascular disease in healthy men and women. Am Heart J. 2010;159:612–9.
 39. Jensen MT, Marott JL, Jensen GB.  Elevated resting heart rate is associated with greater 
risk of cardiovascular and all-cause mortality in current and former smokers. Int J Cardiol. 
2011;151:148–54.
 40. Mancia G, Bousquet P, Elghozi JL, et al. The sympathetic nervous system and the metabolic 
syndrome. J Hypertens. 2007;25:909–20.
 41. Fox K, Borer JS, Camm AJ, et al. Resting heart rate in cardiovascular disease. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2007;50:823–30.
 42. Cook S, Togni M, Schaub MC, et al. High heart rate: a cardiovascular risk factor? Eur Heart J. 
2006;27:2387–93.
P. Palatini337
 43. Palatini P, Longo D, Zaetta V , et al. Evolution of blood pressure and cholesterol in stage 1 
hypertension: role of autonomic nervous system activity. J Hypertens. 2006;24:1375–81.
 44. Palatini P, Mos L, Santonastaso M, et al. HARVEST Study Group. Resting heart rate as a 
predictor of body weight gain in the early stage of hypertension. Obesity (Silver Spring). 
2011;19:618–23.
 45. Esler M, Straznicky N, Eikelis N, et  al. Mechanisms of sympathetic activation in obesity- 
related hypertension. Hypertension. 2006;48:787–96.
 46. Shigetoh Y , Adachi H, Yamagishi S, et al. Higher heart rate may predispose to obesity and 
diabetes mellitus: 20-year prospective study in a general population. Am J Hypertens. 
2009;22:151–5.
 47. Licht CM, de Geus EJ, Penninx BW. Dysregulation of the autonomic nervous system predicts 
the development of the metabolic syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98:2484–93.
 48. Carnethon MR, Yan L, Greenland P, et al. Resting heart rate in middle age and diabetes devel-
opment in older age. Diabetes Care. 2008;31:335–9.
 49. Nagaya T, Yoshida H, Takahashi H, et  al. Resting heart rate and blood pressure, indepen-
dent of each other, proportionally raise the risk for type-2 diabetes mellitus. Int J Epidemiol. 
2010;39:215–22.
 50. Grantham NM, Magliano DJ, Tanamas SK, et al. Higher heart rate increases risk of diabetes 
among men: the Australian Diabetes Obesity and Lifestyle (AusDiab) Study. Diabet Med. 
2013;30:421–7.
 51. Bemelmans RH, Wassink AM, van der Graaf Y , et al. SMART Study Group. Risk of elevated 
resting heart rate on the development of type 2 diabetes in patients with clinically manifest 
vascular diseases. Eur J Endocrinol. 2012;166:717–25.
 52. Jiang X, Liu X, Wu S, et al. Metabolic syndrome is associated with and predicted by resting 
heart rate: a cross-sectional and longitudinal study. Heart. 2015;101:44–9.
 53. Liu X, Luo X, Liu Y , et al. Resting heart rate and risk of metabolic syndrome in adults: a dose-
response meta-analysis of observational studies. Acta Diabetol. 2017;54:223–35.
 54. Julius S, Pascual A V , London R, et al. Role of parasympathetic inhibition in the hyperkinetic 
type of borderline hypertension. Circulation. 1971;44:413–8.
 55. Julius S, Krause L, Schork NJ, et  al. Hyperkinetic borderline hypertension in Tecumseh, 
Michigan. J Hypertens. 1991;9:77–84.
 56. Grassi G, Vailati S, Bertinieri G, et al. Heart rate as marker of sympathetic activity. J Hypertens. 
1998;16:1635–9.
 57. Bohm R, van Baak M, van Hooff M, et  al. Salivary flow in borderline hypertension. Klin 
Wochenschr. 1985;63(Suppl. 3):154–6.
 58. Giannoglou GD, Chatzizisis YS, Zamboulis C, et al. Elevated heart rate and atherosclerosis: an 
overview of the pathogenetic mechanisms. Int J Cardiol. 2008;126:302–12.
 59. Beere PA, Glagov S, Zarins CK. Retarding effect of lowered heart rate on coronary atheroscle-
rosis. Science. 1984;226:180–2.
 60. Kaplan JR, Manuck SB, Clarkson TB, et al. Social status, environment, and atherosclerosis in 
cynomolgus monkeys. Arteriosclerosis. 1982;2:359–68.
 61. Kaplan JR, Manuck SB, Clarkson TB, et al. Social stress and atherosclerosis in normocholes-
terolemic monkeys. Science. 1983;220:733–5.
 62. Kaplan JR, Manuck SB, Adams MR, et al. Inhibition of coronary atherosclerosis by propranolol 
in behaviorally predisposed monkeys fed an atherogenic diet. Circulation. 1987;76:1364–72.
 63. Bassiouny HS, Zarins CK, Kadowaki MH, et al. Hemodynamic stress and experimental aor -
toiliac atherosclerosis. J Vasc Surg. 1994;19:426–34.
 64. Sipahi I, Tuzcu EM, Wolski KE, et al. Beta-blockers and progression of coronary atherosclero-
sis: pooled analysis of 4 intravascular ultrasonography trials. Ann Intern Med. 2007;147:10–8.
 65. Huikuri HV , Jokinen V , Syvanne M, et al. Heart rate variability and progression of coronary 
atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1999;19:1979–85.
 66. Perski A, Olsson G, Laudon C, et al. Minimum heart rate and coronary atherosclerosis: inde-
pendent relations to global severity and rate of progression of angiographic lesions in men with 
myocardial infarction at a young age. Am Heart J. 1992;123:609–16.23 Tachycardia in Prehypertension338
 67. Mangoni AA, Mircoli L, Giannattasio C, et al. Heart rate-dependence of arterial distensibility 
in vivo. J Hypertens. 1996;14:897–901.
 68. Albaladejo P, Asmar R, Safar M, et al. Association between 24 hour ambulatory heart rate and 
arterial stiffness. J Hum Hypertens. 2000;14:137–41.
 69. Sa Cunha R, Pannier B, Benetos A, et al. Association between high heart rate and high arterial 
rigidity in normotensive and hypertensive subjects. J Hypertens. 1997;15(12 Pt 1):1423–30.
 70. Lantelme P, Mestre C, Lievre M, et al. Heart rate: an important confounder of pulse wave 
velocity assessment. Hypertension. 2002;39:1083–7.
 71. Tan I, Spronck B, Kiat H, et al. Heart rate dependency of large artery stiffness. Hypertension. 
2016;68:236–42.
 72. Tomiyama H, Hashimoto H, Tanaka H, et al. Synergistic relationship between changes in the 
pulse wave velocity and changes in the heart rate in middle-aged Japanese adults: a prospective 
study. J Hypertens. 2010;28:687–94.
 73. Laurent S, Boutouyrie P, Asmar R, et al. Aortic stiffness is an independent predictor of all- 
cause and cardiovascular mortality in hypertensive patients. Hypertension. 2001;37:1236–41.
 74. Willum-Hansen T, Staessen JA, Torp-Pedersen C, et al. Prognostic value of aortic pulse wave 
velocity as index of arterial stiffness in the general population. Circulation. 2006;113:664–70.
 75. Ben-Shlomo Y , Spears M, Boustred C, et al. Aortic pulse wave velocity improves cardiovascu-
lar event prediction: an individual participant meta-analysis of prospective observational data 
from 17,635 subjects. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:636–46.
 76. Heidland UE, Strauer BE. Left ventricular muscle mass and elevated heart rate are associated 
with coronary plaque disruption. Circulation. 2001;104:1477–82.
 77. Lown B, Verrier RL.  Neural activity and ventricular fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 1976;294:1165–7.
 78. Schwartz PJ, Priori SG. Sympathetic nervous system and cardiac arrhytmias. In: Zipes DP, 
Jalife J, editors. Cardiac electrophysiology: from cell to bedside. Philadelphia, PA: WB 
Saunders Co; 1990. p. 330–43.
 79. Hohnloser SH, Klingenheben T, van de Loo A, et al. Reflex versus tonic vagal activity as a 
prognostic parameter in patients with sustained ventricular tachyardia or ventricular fibrilla-
tion. Circulation. 1994;89:1068–73.
 80. Julius S, Randall OS, Esler MD, et al. Altered cardiac responsiveness and regulation in the nor -
mal cardiac output type of borderline hypertension. Circ Res. 1975;36–37(Suppl. I):I-199–207.
 81. Palatini P, Rosei EA, Casiglia E, et al. Management of the hypertensive patient with elevated 
heart rate: Statement of the Second Consensus Conference endorsed by the European Society 
of Hypertension. J Hypertens. 2016;34:813–21.
 82. Palatini P, Canali C, Graniero GR, et  al. Relationship of plasma renin activity with caf-
feine intake and physical training in mild hypertensive men. HARVEST Study Group. Eur J 
Epidemiol. 1996;12:485–91.
 83. Hering D, Kucharska W, Kara T, et al. Smoking is associated with chronic sympathetic activa-
tion in hypertension. Blood Press. 2010;19:152–5.
 84. Reid CM, Dart AM, Dewar EM, et al. Interactions between the effects of exercise and weight 
loss on risk factors, cardiovascular haemodynamics and left ventricular structure in overweight 
subjects. J Hypertens. 1994;12:291–301.
 85. Christensen JH, Korup E, Aarøe J, et al. Fish consumption, n-3 fatty acids in cell membranes, 
and heart rate variability in survivors of myocardial infarction with left ventricular dysfunc-
tion. Am J Cardiol. 1997;79:1670–3.
 86. Mozaffarian D, Geelen A, Brouwer IA, et al. Effect of fish oil on heart rate in humans: a meta- 
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Circulation. 2005;112:1945–52.
 87. Dallongeville J, Yarnell J, Ducimetiere P, et al. Fish consumption is associated with lower heart 
rates. Circulation. 2003;108:820–5.
 88. Brook RD, Appel LJ, Rubenfire M, et al. American Heart Association Professional Education 
Committee of the Council for High Blood Pressure Research, Council on Cardiovascular and 
Stroke Nursing, Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, and Council on Nutrition, Physical 
Activity. Beyond medications and diet: alternative approaches to lowering blood pressure: a 
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Hypertension. 2013;61:1360–83.
P. Palatini339
 89. Jennings G, Dart A, Meredith I, et al. Effects of exercise and other nonpharmacological mea-
sures on blood pressure and cardiac hypertrophy. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1991;17(Suppl 
2):S70–4.
 90. Palatini P.  Cardiovascular effects of exercise in young hypertensives. Int J Sports Med. 
2012;33:683–90.
 91. Genovesi S, Zaccaria D, Rossi E, et al. Effects of exercise training on heart rate and QT inter -
val in healthy young individuals: are there gender differences? Europace. 2007;9:55–60.
 92. Laterza MC, de Matos LD, Trombetta IC, et al. Exercise training restores baroreflex sensitiv-
ity in never-treated hypertensive patients. Hypertension. 2007;49:1298–306.
 93. Duncan JJ, Farr JE, Upton SJ, et al. The effects of aerobic exercise on plasma catecholamines 
and blood pressure in patients with mild essential hypertension. JAMA. 1985;254:2609–13.
 94. Jennings GL, Chin-Dusting JP, Kingwell BA, et al. Modulation of vascular function by diet 
and exercise. Clin Exp Hypertens. 1997;19:727–37.
 95. Meredith IT, Friberg P, Jennings GL, et al. Exercise training lowers resting renal but not car -
diac sympathetic activity in humans. Hypertension. 1991;18:575–82.
 96. Palatini P, Visentin P, Dorigatti F, et al. Regular physical activity prevents development of left 
ventricular hypertrophy in hypertension. Eur Heart J. 2009;30:225–32.
 97. Rauramaa R, Halonen P, Vaisanen SB, et al. Effects of aerobic physical exercise on inflamma-
tion and atherosclerosis in men: the DNASCO Study: a six-year randomized, controlled trial. 
Ann Intern Med. 2004;140:1007–14.
 98. Palatini P, Bratti P, Palomba D, et al. Regular physical activity attenuates the BP response to 
public speaking and delays the development of hypertension. J Hypertens. 2010;28:1186–93.
 99. O’Sullivan SE, Bell C. The effects of exercise and training on human cardiovascular reflex 
control. J Auton Nerv Syst. 2000;81:16–24.
 100. Garber CE, Blissmer B, Deschenes MR, et al. American College of Sports Medicine. American 
College of Sports Medicine position stand. Quantity and quality of exercise for developing 
and maintaining cardiorespiratory, musculoskeletal, and neuromotor fitness in apparently 
healthy adults: guidance for prescribing exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011;43:1334–59.
 101. Palatini P.  Need for a revision of the normal limits of resting heart rate. Hypertension. 
1999;33:622–5.
 102. Teo KK, Yusuf S, Furberg CD. Effects of prophylactic antiarrhythmic drug therapy in acute 
myocardial infarction: an overview of results from randomized controlled trials. JAMA. 
1993;270:1589–95.
 103. Packer M, Bristow MR, Cohn JN, for the U.S. Carvedilol Heart Failure Study Group. The 
effect of Carvedilol on morbidity and mortality in patients with chronic heart failure. N Engl 
J Med. 1996;334:1349–55.
 104. Fox K, Ford I, Steg PG, et al. Heart rate as a prognostic risk factor in patients with coronary 
artery disease and left-ventricular systolic dysfunction (BEAUTIFUL): a subgroup analysis 
of a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2008;372:817–21.
 105. Swedberg K, Komajda M, Bohm M, et al. Ivabradine and outcomes in chronic heart failure 
(SHIFT): a randomised placebo-controlled study. Lancet. 2010;376:875–85.23 Tachycardia in Prehypertension341 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_24
S. Julius 
Michigan Medicine, Frankel Cardiovascular Center, University of Michigan,  
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
e-mail: sjulius@umich.edu24The Role of the Brain in Prehypertension
Stevo Julius
Chronic BP elevation induces changes in the structure and function of cardiovascu-
lar organs. Consequently, pathophysiologic studies of advanced hypertension are 
likely to reveal a mixture of causes and consequences of the high BP. Therefore, we 
focused on young patients with marginal BP elevation (prehypertension). It was 
assumed that in these subjects it may be possible to detect mechanisms which pre-
cede the evolution of advanced hypertension.
In early studies we used invasive methods for assessment of hemodynamics. A 
catheter was introduced into the brachial vein and advanced near to or in (80%) the 
right atrium to inject indocyanine green dye. In parallel a short catheter was placed 
in the brachial artery to measure the dye dilution curve with a densitometer. The 
intra-arterial BP was monitored throughout the study.
Using this method, we confirmed previous reports [1 –4] that prehypertension is 
associated with a hyperkinetic state of increased cardiac output and fast heart rates. By 
year 1976 we accumulated invasive hemodynamic data on 145 participants with pre-
hypertension and 90 healthy normotensive volunteers [5 ]. About one third of the pre-
hypertensive group had tachycardia (Fig.  24.1). Another graph in the same study 
showed a similarly skewed distribution of cardiac output in the prehypertension group.
In an early study [6], we compared the hemodynamic characteristics of normo-
tension and borderline hypertension (prehypertension). At rest in a recumbent posi-
tion, the vascular resistance values of normotension and borderline hypertension 
groups overlapped. But when the resistance was compared in relation to cardiac 
output, the borderline hypertensives had higher vascular resistance. In other words, 
patients with prehypertension were not capable to adequately dilate to accommodate 
the increased cardiac output. This suggested that the circulation in prehypertension 342
is not normal and that it resembles the characteristically increased vascular resis-
tance of established hypertension.
In another study [7 ], we injected intravenously large doses of first propranolol 
(0.2 mg/kg) and second atropine (0.04 mg/kg) to completely block the autonomic 
nervous system receptors both in prehypertension and healthy volunteers. Injection of 
propranolol elicited a larger than normal decrease of heart rate and cardiac output 
which was indicative of an increased sympathetic tone in prehypertension. After atro-
pine a lesser increase of heart rate and cardiac output was seen in the prehypertension 
group. Thus the parasympathetic tone in prehypertension was decreased (Fig. 24.2).
The fact that both sympathetic and parasympathetic tones were involved demon-
strated that the aberration emanated from the medulla oblongata where the sympathetic 
and parasympathetic tone are regulated in a reciprocal fashion. Furthermore, the block-
ade erased the difference in heart rate and cardiac output between the two groups. Thus 
the hyperkinetic circulation in prehypertension was entirely neurogenic.
However, the blockade did not erase the increase of BP in prehypertension. Prior 
to injection the BP elevation was associated with a high cardiac output, and after the 
blockade, it was due to high vascular resistance [8].130
120
110
100
90Hear t Rate beats /min80
70
60
50
Border lines
n=148Controls
n=90***
Fig. 24.1 Distribution of the heart rate after 10 min of rest in recumbent position in young men 
(18–35 years). (Figure reprinted with permission from Julius S, Esler MD, editors. The nervous 
system in arterial hypertension. Springfield: Charles C Thomas; 1976. Library of Congress Card 
Number 74-30203, ISBN: 0-398-03377-3) 
S. Julius343
RestHear t Rate (bpm)
cardiac Inde x (l/mln/m 2)
Propranolol Atropine Rest PropranololBorder line Hyper tension
Control Subjects
Atropine120Elevated HR and cardiac output(CO) in prehypertension are due to
↑Sympathetic and ↓Parasympathetic tone
110
100
90
80
70
6050
45
40
35
30
25
20
Fig. 24.2 Response to intravenous injection of propranolol (0.2 mg/kg) followed by 0.04 mg/kg 
of atropine in patients with hyperkinetic borderline hypertension (n = 14, average age 23 years)  
(n + 88) and in paid volunteers (n = 16, average age 24 years). (Figure reprinted with permission 
from Julius S, Esler MD, editors. The nervous system in arterial hypertension. Springfield: Charles 
C Thomas; 1976. Library of Congress Card Number 74-30203, ISBN: 0-398-03377-3) 
This hemodynamic plasticity in which the BP level is maintained while the 
underlying hemodynamic changes is well documented. The comparison of hemody-
namic responses to various stressors is shown in Figs. 24.3 and 24.4.
The bold diagonal lines in the graph are iso-resistance lines. The mean BP is 
represented on the ordinate, and the cardiac output index is shown on the abscissa. 
Prehypertension is marked by triangle and healthy volunteers are shown by circles. 
Figure  24.3 shows stressors which increase the cardiac output. The left panel is the 
response to mild exercise (4 min on a load of 300 kg-m/min), and the right is the 
effect of expansion of plasma volume by infusion 5% dextran in saline 13 mL/kg 
over a period of 45 min.
In both instances there was a substantial increase of cardiac index and a decrease of 
vascular resistance in both groups. The BP in the prehypertension remained elevated, and 
the response lines of the prehypertension and volunteer groups were perfectly parallel.
Stimuli which increased the vascular resistance are shown in Fig.  24.4. In the left 
panel, measurements were taken at baseline and 10 min after injection of propranolol. 
In the right panel, measurements were taken in recumbence and after 4 min of sitting.
Both after propranolol and after sitting, the prehypertension group maintained a 
higher BP level, and the trends of BP changes in prehypertension and control group 
were similar. Note the hemodynamic plasticity in the graph. At baseline the higher 
BP in prehypertension was associated with a high cardiac output. The blockade 
abolished the difference in cardiac output, and at that point, the higher BP in the 
prehypertension was linked to an increase of vascular resistance.24 The Role of the Brain in Prehypertension344
120
110
100 Mean Blood pressure (mmHg)Mean Blood pressure (mmHg)90
80
70
60110
10040 30
2040 30
2090
80
70
602 3 3 4 2 4
Cardiac Index (L/min/m2)C ardiac Index (L/min/m2)
Fig. 24.4 Hemodynamic response to sitting up after recumbent position (right panel) and after 
injection of propranolol (left panel). (Figure reprinted with permission from Julius S, Esler MD, 
editors. The nervous system in arterial hypertension. Springfield: Charles C Thomas; 1976. Library 
of Congress Card Number 74-30203, ISBN: 0-398-03377-3)130
120
110
100Mean Blood pressure (mmHg)
Mean Blood pressure (mmHg)90
80
70
60110
10040 3040 30
20
2090
80
70
6033 4 24
Cardiac Index (L/min/m 2) Cardiac Index (L/min/m 2)5
Fig. 24.3 Hemodynamic response to mild exercise and plasma volume expansion in borderline 
hypertension (n = 77) and in paid volunteers (n = 88). (Figure reprinted with permission from 
Julius S, Esler MD, editors. The nervous system in arterial hypertension. Springfield: Charles C 
Thomas; 1976. Library of Congress Card Number 74-30203, ISBN: 0-398-03377-3)
S. Julius345
The effect of total cardiac receptor blockade with propranolol and atropine is 
shown in Fig.  24.5. There was a remarkable difference in hemodynamic adjustment 
in the two groups. The prehypertensives maintained the BP elevation by increasing 
the vascular resistance, whereas the control group responded by a modest increase 
of cardiac output.
The evidence above proves that the brain seeks a certain preset BP level in the 
two groups; higher in prehypertension and lower in healthy volunteers. If the BP 
goal cannot be achieved by changes in cardiac output, it will be attained by a raise 
of vascular resistance.
This hemodynamic plasticity appears to be the “modus operandi” of the brain 
under many other circumstances. In a series of experiments, we investigated the 
BP increase with hindquarter compression in dogs [9 ]. In these experiments an 
inflatable suit was placed on the hindquarter of the animals. When inflated, the 
suit compresses the dog’s hind limbs, and this elicited a large increase of mean BP 
(+30–40 mm Hg). This increase lasted as long as the suit was inflated (up to 3 h), 
but after deflation the BP instantly returned to normal values. The BP elevation 
was neurogenic and could be abolished by spinal anesthesia. The BP surge after 
compression was invariably due to increased vascular resistance. In a group of 
dogs, we injected the alpha-blocker phenoxybenzamine [10] to prevent 120
110
100
90
80
70
6040
30
20
23 4
Cardiac Index (L/min/m2)Mean Blood pressure (mmHg)Fig. 24.5 In this 
experiment subjects 
remained recumbent and 
received an injection of 
propranolol. Circles 
represent the healthy 
volunteers (n = 17) and 
triangles represent the 
borderline hypertensives  
(n = 18). Arrows indicate 
the trends after an injection 
of atropine was added to 
propranolol in order to 
chemically denervate the 
heart. (Figure reprinted 
with permission from 
Julius S, Esler MD, editors. 
The nervous system in 
arterial hypertension. 
Springfield: Charles C 
Thomas; 1976. Library of 
Congress Card Number 
74-30203, ISBN: 
0-398-03377-3)24 The Role of the Brain in Prehypertension346
vasoconstriction (Fig.  24.6). The broken line shows that prior to the injection, the 
increase of BP was associated with an increase of vascular resistance. As the solid 
line shows, after the alpha-adrenergic, the BP increase blockade did not abolish 
the BP response, but at that point, the BP surge was linked to an increase of car -
diac output.
This hemodynamic plasticity is ubiquitous, and in paper titled “Blood Pressure 
Seeking Property of the Central Nervous System” [11], we reviewed the ample 
evidence in the literature that the magnitude of BP increase will be preserved regard-
less of the underlying hemodynamics.
All evidence about the role of the brain in prehypertension shown so far was 
obtained by invasive hemodynamic measurement. However, the validity of such 
findings was challenged already in 1960 by ED Freis [1]. He confirmed that two 
thirds of patients with hypertension have increased peripheral resistance. He won-
dered “whether (in) the remaining one third the elevated cardiac output is the pri-
mary hemodynamic fault or whether apprehension associated with the procedure 
disturbed the basal hemodynamic state.” This notion that the hyperkinetic state is a 150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
130 150 170
Cardiac Inde x (ml/kg)MBP (mm Hg)
190 210
Fig. 24.6 The blood pressure (BP) of eight dogs after hindquarter compression. Compression 
reproducibly causes huge BP increases (+60 mmHg). The increase is neurogenic since it is abol-
ished with spinal anesthesia. Invariably the compression BP increase is associated with increased 
vascular resistance (broken line). After vasoconstriction was prevented with alpha adrenergic 
blockade the BP increase was associated with an increase of cardiac output (solid line). (Figure 
reprinted with permission from Julius S, Esler MD, editors. The nervous system in arterial hyper -
tension. Springfield: Charles C Thomas; 1976. Library of Congress Card Number 74-30203, 
ISBN: 0-398-03377-3) 
S. Julius347
sign of passing nervousness was embraced by many practicing physicians. Such 
attitude ignored the contemporary existing solid evidence that transient tachycardia 
is a predictor of hypertension and of adverse cardiovascular outcomes [12]. Evidence 
that tachycardia is a strong cardiovascular risk factor continues to accumulate and 
has been more recently reviewed [13].
The objection that our findings may reflect the stress caused the invasive mea-
surement could not be rejected out of hand. After assessing the validity of various 
noninvasive methods of measurement of cardiac output [14, 15], we chose the echo- 
Doppler technique for the Tecumseh field study [16]. The study investigated the 
evolution of hypertension in a sample of the healthy village population. Of 691 
healthy villagers (average age 32.6 years), 99 had a clinic BP reading exceeding 
140/90 mm Hg. Thirty-seven percent of these subjects with prehypertension had 
hyperkinetic circulation.
Besides finding a similar prevalence of hyperkinetic prehypertension with nonin-
vasive as with invasive methods, the field study in Tecumseh provided additional 
information about the pathophysiology and natural history of the hyperkinetic state. 
Hyperkinetic prehypertensives had significantly elevated plasma norepinephrine 
values. Their parents had significantly increased BP levels. We had access to previ-
ous BP measurement, and the present hyperkinetic prehypertensives had elevated 
BP at 5, 8, 21, and 23 years of age. A subgroup with “pure” hyperkinetic state at 
32 years of age had tachycardia at 7 and 22 years of age [17]. Thus rather than hav-
ing a passing BP elevation, individuals with hyperkinetic state had a lifelong 
increase of BP and heart rate.
In conclusion, one third of young adults have a neurogenic prehypertension char -
acterized by increased BP and tachycardia. In such patients sympathetic stimulation is 
increased, whereas the parasympathetic inhibition is decreased. This suggests that the 
aberration emanates from the medulla oblongata where the sympathetic and parasym-
pathetic tones are integrated in a reciprocal fashion. In achieving the higher BP goal, 
the brain shows a remarkable plasticity; if the stressor is associated with increased 
cardiac output and that increase is blocked (by beta-blockers), an equal BP increase 
will be achieved by a higher vascular resistance. Similarly, if the original stressor 
induced increased vascular resistance and this was blocked (with alpha- blockers), the 
same degree of BP elevation will be achieved by increased cardiac output.
There is no evidence of increased BP variability in hyperkinetic prehypertension, 
and such patients are not hyper-responders to various stressors.
Overall these findings prove that the brain plays an important role in the patho-
physiology of one third of subjects with prehypertension.
References
 1. Freis ED. Hemodynamics of hypertension. Physiol Rev. 1960;40:27–54.
 2. Eich RH, Peters RJ, Cuddy RP, et al. The hemodynamics of labile hypertension. Am Heart J. 
1962;63:188–95.
 3. Widimski J, Fejfarova MH, Fejfar Z.  Changes of cardiac output in hypertensive disease. 
Cardiologia. 1957;31:381–9.
 4. Finkielman S, Worcel M, Agrest A.  Hemodynamic patterns in essential hypertension. 
Circulation. 1965;31:356–68.24 The Role of the Brain in Prehypertension348
 5. Julius S. Neurogenic component in borderline hypertension. Chapter 14. In: Julius S, Esler 
MD, editors. The nervous system in arterial hypertension. Springfield: Charles C Thomas 
Publisher; 1976.
 6. Julius S, Conway J. Hemodynamic studies in patients with borderline blood pressure elevation. 
Circulation. 1968;38:282–8.
 7. Julius S, Pascual A, London S. Role of parasympathetic Inhibition in the hyperkinetic type of 
borderline hypertension. Circulation. 1971;44:413–8.
 8. Julius S, Pascual A V , Sannerstedt R, Mitchel C.  Relationship between cardiac output and 
peripheral resistance in borderline hypertension. Circulation. 1971;43:382–90.
 9. Osterziel K, Julius S, Brant DO. Blood pressure elevation during hindquarter compression in 
dogs is neurogenic. J Hypertens. 1984;2:411–7.
 10. Julius S, Sanchez R, Brant D. Pressure increase to external hind quarter compression in dogs: 
a facultative regulatory response. J Hypertens. 1986;4:54–6.
 11. Julius S.  The blood pressure seeking property of the central nervous system. J Hypertens. 
1988;6:177–85. Editorial review.
 12. Levy RL, White PD, et al. Transient tachycardia; prognostic significance alone and in associa-
tion with transient hypertension. Med Press Egypt. 1946;38:207–12.
 13. Palatini P, Julius S. Association of tachycardia with morbidity and mortality: pathophysiologi-
cal considerations. J Hum Hypertens. 1997;11:S19–27.
 14. Ferguson RJ, Faulkner JA, Julius S, Conway J. Comparison of cardiac output determined by 
CO 2 rebreathing and dye dilution methods. J Appl Physiol. 1968;25:450–4.
 15. Kiowski W, Randall OS, Steffens TG, Julius S.  Reliability of echocardiography in assess-
ing cardiac output. A comparative study with a dye dilution technique. Klin Wochenschr. 
1981;59:1115–20.
 16. Julius S, Jamerson K, Mejia A, Krause L, Schork N, Jones K. The association of borderline 
hypertension with target organ changes and higher coronary risk Tecumseh blood pressure 
study. JAMA. 1990;264:354–8.
 17. Julius S, Jamerson K. Sympathetics, insulin resistance and coronary risk in hypertension: the 
‘chicken-and-egg’ question. J Hypertens. 1994;12:495–502. Editorial review.
S. Julius349 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_25
G. Seravalle 
Cardiology Department, Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS Ospedale San Luca,  
Milano, Italy 
D. Hering · K. Narkiewicz ( *) 
Department of Hypertension and Diabetology, Medical University of Gdansk,  
Gdansk, Poland
e-mail: knark@gumed.edu.pl 
G. Grassi 
Clinica Medica, Department of Medicine and Surgery, University Milano-Bicocca,  
Milan, Italy 
IRCCS Multimedica, Milan, Italy25The Role of the Brain in Neurogenic 
Prehypertension
Gino Seravalle, Dagmara Hering, Guido Grassi, 
and Krzysztof Narkiewicz
25.1  Introduction
Prehypertension has gained significant recognition over the past decade due to its 
strong association with an increased risk for CV mortality, mostly from myocardial 
infarction (MI) and coronary artery disease (CAD). The excess risk for CV events 
and organ damage has been particularly evident in stage 2 prehypertension (i.e. 
high-normal BP), the group more likely to develop hypertension when compared to 
stage 1 prehypertension. The mechanisms underlying the pathophysiology of pre-
hypertension, and the resultant associated risk and poor prognosis remain multifac-
torial, involving complex interplay between neural mechanisms, haemodynamics, 
environmental factors and genetics. Evidence indicates that neurogenic component 
with the activation of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) and sympathetic nervous 
system (SNS) lies in the development of prehypertension, its transition to hyperten-
sion and adverse CV complications. Patients with prehypertension commonly dis-
play the presence of traditional risk factors (i.e. weight gain, hiperinsulinaemia, 
insulin resistance, dyslipidaemia), circulating markers (i.e. high levels of adipo-
kines, inflammatory cytokines) and underlying metabolic abnormalities which 350
potentiate sympathetic activation, thereby playing a triggering role in BP elevation, 
subclinical organ damage, progression to hypertension and further disease contin-
uum. In this context, identifying subjects with prehypertension, mainly in the upper 
end of BP readings and concomitant CV risk, is crucial in prevention of hyperten-
sion and CV events.
25.2  Definition
In the past, patients with occasionally elevated BP values were classified as having 
so-called ‘labile hypertension’ and excessive BP variability. Only in the ’70, with 
the absence of clear evidence of a greater BP-related variability, the term ‘labile’ 
was replaced with ‘borderline hypertension’ [1]. The JNC5 (Fifth Joint National 
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood 
Pressure) and JNC6 [2] for the first time introduced the term high-normal BP with 
referring values of 130–139/85–89 mmHg. This term and BP range was also main-
tained in the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) guidelines [3]. Thus, over 
the last three decades both definitions with the same BP values have been used.
25.3  Heredity
Starting from the observation that normotensive subjects with a family history of 
hypertension were characterized by higher BP values and increased adrenergic tone 
than those observed in subjects without a positive familiar history [4], research was 
focused on the possible influence of inherited genes.
To this aim, a large cross-sectional study on identical and non-identical twins, 
their siblings and family members was performed [5]. Prehypertensives had a heri-
tability for systolic BP (44.6%, p < 0.001) and demonstrated a significant release in 
plasma norepinephrine by 65% (p < 0.001) and heart rate by 62% (p < 0.001). A 
similar impact was observed for cardiac index and systemic vascular resistance 
index. As shown in Fig.  25.1 an increase in LV dP/dT max, an index of cardiac con-
tractility is significantly higher in prehypertensive and hypertensive subjects when 
compared to normotensives suggesting that more than 50% of changes in SBP could 
be accounted for this haemodynamic parameter. A role of the autonomic nervous 
system in the pathogenesis of prehypertension and progression to the hypertensive 
state is well recognized along with genetically determined haemodynamic traits.
Genes are increasingly involved in the pathogenesis of hypertension, however 
the results are still limited. Although some studies identified numerous causative 
genes implicated in the progression of the hypertensive state [6–8], there is a need 
to continue with future human genomic studies
G. Seravalle et al.351
1100 1200 1300 1400
LV dP/dT max (mmHg/sec)BP (mmHg)
NormalPre-
hypertension HypertensionLV dP/dT max p < 0.00 1SBP
DBP140
120
100
80
60BP (mmHg)
3103 30 3503 70 390
Plasma norepinephrine (pg/ml)Norepinephrine p = 0.0028SBP
DBP
NormalPre-
hypertension Hypertension
1400
1300
1200
1100LV dP/dT max (mmHg/sec)
300 3203 40 360 380 400
Plasma norepinephrine (pg/ml)Pre-
Normalhypertension HypertensionNorepinephrine p = 0.0028Pre-hypertension:
contribution of
left ventricular contractility
140
120
100
80
60Norepinephrine secretio n
in pre-hypertension
Pre-hypertension:
contribution of norepinephrine secretion
to left ventricular contractility
Fig. 25.1 Systolic (S) and diastolic (D) blood pressure (BP) as a function of left ventricular (LV) 
contractility (max change in pressure divided by change in time) in normotensive, prehypertensive 
and hypertensive subjects (upper left panel); average plasma norepinephrine levels versus average 
SBP and DBP in the three groups (upper right panel); average plasma norepinephrine levels versus 
average LV function (lower panel). Modified from Ref. [5] with the permission25 The Role of the Brain in Neurogenic Prehypertension352
25.4  Prehypertension as a Risk Factor
The relationship between BP and CV risk is well established. Evidence from pro-
spective longitudinal studies documented that the rise in BP from a threshold of 
115/75 mmHg increases the risk for premature CV morbidity and mortality, particu-
larly death from cardiac and cerebral events [9]. The Framingham Study has shown 
that prehypertension is associated with a higher risk of MI and CAD [10]. While the 
link between prehypertension and atherothrombotic brain infarction (ABI) was not 
observed in the Framingham Study, in line with previous findings there was a close 
association between systolic BP and ABI in prehypertensive participants [10].
Further evidence for the relationship between prehypertension and disease pro-
gression was examined in the population-based autopsy Hisayama Study [11]. 
Accordingly, categorized BP levels in the prehypertensive state were significantly 
associated with the severity of renal arteriosclerosis that was irrespective of the 
presence or absence of target organ damage, or of the size of intrarenal arteries [11]. 
These findings suggest that subjects with prehypertension should be considered as 
high-risk population even in the absence of end-organ damage.
Interestingly, a recent population-based study demonstrated that increased dia-
stolic BP (80–89 mmHg) during late pregnancy (maternal prehypertension at 36 
gestational weeks) adversely influences maternal perfusion of the placenta leading 
to foetal outcomes (i.e. a small-for-gestational-age, stillbirth) when compared to 
normotensive women (<80  mmHg) [12]. However, the risk of stillbirth was not 
associated with the rise in diastolic BP from early to late pregnancy.
Given the aforementioned findings it appears that BP levels in the prehyperten-
sive state per se confer an increased prognostic risk with or without the evidence for 
subclinical organ damage. Subjects with high-normal BP have a greater prevalence 
of adverse risk factors when compared to normotensives including an increase in 
body weight or obesity, metabolic syndrome, glycaemic and lipid abnormalities, 
and are more often smokers [13] which additively and synergistically contribute to 
established hypertension and CV disease. The presence of organ damage in high-
normal BP is not uncommon and includes cardiac (i.e. LVH, diastolic dysfunction, 
decreased coronary flow reserve), vascular (endothelial dysfunction, arterial stiff-
ness) and renal damage (microalbuminuria, reduced glomerular filtration rate) 
which are likely to potentiate further risk and disease progression [14]. The Trial of 
Preventing Hypertension (TROPHY) was first controlled clinical trial that estab-
lished the safety and efficacy of an angiotensin receptor blocker for reducing BP 
and preventing or delaying progression to hypertension in subjects with high-nor -
mal BP [15]. However, despite available evidence for increased CV risk in stage 2 
prehypertension, the initiation of BP lowering therapy in this cohort continues to be 
under debate.
Although one in three to four adults of the healthy population can be categorized 
as having high-normal BP, it should be noted that not all individuals with prehyper -
tension are at comparable absolute risk [14]. Further randomized clinical trials are 
urgently required whether treating high-normal BP may improve CV endpoints in 
this cohort.
G. Seravalle et al.353
25.5  Tracking Phenomenon
Tracking phenomena is an important longitudinal characteristic of BP changes in 
response to haemodynamics and metabolic alterations, vascular remodeling and 
underlying neural mechanisms which play a critical role in BP rise over time; the 
transition from normal BP values via prehypertensive state to established hyperten-
sion. A previous study found that plasma noradrenaline levels predicted subsequent 
BP elevation and weight gain in lean normotensive men followed annually over 
5 years [16] suggesting a cause-and-effect relationship between sympathetic activa-
tion and BP. Direct recordings of muscle sympathetic nerve activity (MSNA) mea-
sured in subjects with prehypertension have shown that MSNA tracking corresponds 
with BP changes over time suggesting that tonic activation is likely to influence 
time-related increase in resting BP and development of sustained hypertension in 
prehypertension [17]. As illustrated in Fig.  25.2, subjects with prehypertension have 
increased their systolic BP (Fig.  25.2a) and MSNA (Fig.  25.2b) over an 8-year 
period and one participant developed hypertension and MI between baseline and 
follow-up. A separate subject developed hypertension and received antihypertensive 
treatment over the course of study, and he subsequently had a MI 2 years after study 
completion (Fig.  25.2a, b). Moreover, in this prehypertensive cohort pulse wave 
velocity was directly associated with MSNA after 8 years that was independent of 
BP, body mass index (BMI), heart rate, waist circumference and age suggesting that 
arterial stiffness and sympathetic activation are possible mechanisms underlying the 
associated increased risk, likely contributing to poor CV outcomes. This, however, 
needs to be further explored.
110120130140150160
Baselin e+ 8 year sSBP (mmHg)P<0.00 1
020406080
Baseline +8 year sMSNA  (bursts/min.)P<0.00 1ab
Fig. 25.2 Individual changes in office systolic blood pressure (SBP) at baseline and after 8 years 
(a) and corresponding individual changes in muscle sympathetic nerve activity (MSNA) at base-
line and after 8 years in all subjects with prehypertension (b). One subject (square) developed 
hypertension and a MI between baseline and follow-up. A separate subject (triangle) developed 
hypertension and received antihypertensive treatment (beta-blocker) over the course of the study, 
and subsequently had a MI 2 years after study completion (at 10 years of follow-up). Modified 
from Ref. [17] with the permission25 The Role of the Brain in Neurogenic Prehypertension354
25.6  Mechanisms Related to Prehypertension
25.6.1  Autonomic and Reflex Function
The contribution of adrenergic influence to the prehypertensive state has been sup-
ported by findings from several studies [5, 18, 19]. While a role of white-coat or 
masked hypertension has been frequently suggested as a causative factor for the 
increase in adrenergic tone and BP levels in the prehypertensive state [20–22], other 
mechanisms including reflex and metabolic appear to be involved with a particular 
relevance not only in the early stage but also in sustaining its progression to an 
established condition. As shown in Fig.  25.3 (left panel) prehypertensive state is 
characterized by BP values greater than those observed in subjects with normal or 
optimal BP levels and this was associated with a significant increase in sympathetic 
nerve traffic directly recorded to skeletal muscle (right panel). The dissociation 
observed between the unchanged heart rate and the peripheral nerve traffic could be 
related to the fact that the hyperadrenergic tone affects only the peripheral CV sys-
tem. This hypothesis, however, is not confirmed by the finding that the low-fre-
quency component of the heart rate variability signal is increased in subjects with 
high-normal BP [23]. It is also possible to speculate that, on the basis of previous 
studies [24, 25] in hypertension, heart rate may represent an insensitive marker of 
the overall CV adrenergic activity, due to its predominant parasympathetic control. 
It is also evident that the baroreflex modulation of the sinus-node activity is already 
impaired in high-normal BP state suggesting that the baroreflex heart rate control is 
a very early phenomenon and the effects are already evident with minimal changes 
in BP values (Fig. 25.4) [18].
BP HR
4050607080
Clinic Finapre sABPM(b/min) (mmHg)
406080100120140
Clinic Finapres ABPM******
***
** * **MSNA
010203040506070
Optima lNormal High-normal(bs/100 hb)
****
Fig. 25.3 Clinic, beat-to-beat (Finapres) and ambulatory (ABPM) blood pressure (BP) values in 
optimal (open bars), normal (grey bars) and high-normal (black bars) BP (right panel); Clinic, 
Finapres and ABPM heart rate in the three groups (middle panel); muscle sympathetic nerve activ-
ity corrected for heart rate (MSNAc) in the three groups (left panel). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 refer to 
the level of statistical significance between groups. Modified from Ref. [9] with the permission
G. Seravalle et al.355
25.6.2  Metabolic Changes
This hyperadrenergic state observed in prehypertensives or high-normal BP sub-
jects is likely to sustain as a result of several confounders including white-coat reac-
tion or masked hypertension, or non-dipping status, or psychological stress [26, 27]. 
Nevertheless, the factor more involved appears to be a metabolic one indicating that 
is a greater increase in plasma insulin levels and the relative insulin resistance state 
(Fig.  25.5) [18]. It has also been observed that among prehypertensives there is a 
predominance of those with BMI over 25 [28–30], however the potential influence 
of birth weight and gestational age are still debated [31, 32]. Family history of 
hypertension and obesity represents a risk of suffering from prehypertension 2.25 
times higher compared to the risk in those with a lower BMI. The increase in BMI 
is associated with hyperinsulinaemia and insulin resistance, and is accompanied by 
other alterations including hyperleptinaemia, hypercortisolaemia, vascular altera-
tions, activation of the RAS and natriuretic peptide activity [33].
25.6.3  Haemodynamics Characteristics
Old studies have shown that in the earlier stage of the hypertensive state the major 
haemodynamic determinants were high cardiac output with normal peripheral vascu-
lar resistance, often accompanied by an increase in heart rate and inappropriate high 
oxygen consumption [34– 36]. This condition is sustained by the hyperadrenergic 
tone through stimulation of peripheral metabolic receptors and simultaneous 
enhancement of α -adrenergic tone. Decreased baroreceptor sensitivity has been 
hypothesized to be an underlying cause of haemodynamic changes observed in these 
subjects [4 , 18, 37, 38]. Normotensive subjects with persistence of the hyperkinetic 
state are two or three times more likely to develop hypertension [39]. To explain the 16
12
8
4
0  ∆MSNA  (% i.a.) /  ∆MA P (mmHg) 
Optimal Normal High-normal ∆HR (b/min) / ∆MA P (mmHg )* 2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Optimal Normal High-normal 
Fig. 25.4 Sensitivities of baroreceptor-heart rate (HR) and baroreceptor-muscle sympathetic 
nerve activity (MSNA) expressed as average ratios between changes in HR or in MSNA and 
changes in mean blood pressure (BP) in the three groups of subjects as indicated and explained 
statistically in Fig. 25.3. Modified from Ref. [9] with the permission25 The Role of the Brain in Neurogenic Prehypertension356
transition from hyperkinetic state to established hypertension it is necessary to 
hypothesize a mechanism through which cardiac output decreases and vascular resis-
tance increases with concomitant normalization of markers associated with enhanced 
adrenergic tone. It is more likely that, starting from hyperkinetic state, the decrease 
in cardiac output in the course of hypertension depends on both the elevated BP and 
enhanced sympathetic tone. The enhanced sympathetic tone is also responsible for 
the down-regulation of cardiac β -adrenergic receptors [40]. The reduction in stroke 
volume depends on both a decrease in cardiac compliance and an inadequate myo-
cardial relaxation, thereby contributing to a reduction in left ventricular filling [41].
25.6.4  Vascular Changes
Starting from the concept of Folkow [42], it has been show that the development of 
hypertension is accompanied by a progressive increase in vascular resistance. The 
vascular hypertrophy is an adaptive phenomenon of the resistance vessels that carry 
on a progressive thickening of the smooth muscle of the media. This results in an 
increase in wall/lumen ratio, vascular resistance and hyperresponsiveness to the 
vasoconstrictive stimuli, thus amplifying the resistance [43–46]. These structural 
alterations have been shown to be associated with CV functional alterations includ-
ing an early impairment of the left ventricular diastolic function, a reduced arterial 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
MSNAc (bs/100hb)rp= 0.39267
p = 0.00013.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0HOMA
Fig. 25.5 Relationship between muscle sympathetic nerve activity (MSNA) corrected for heart 
rate and HOMA-IR in the three groups of subjects shown in Fig.  25.3, considered as a whole. 
Correlation coefficient (r) and P values are shown. Modified from Ref. [9] with the permission
G. Seravalle et al.357
distensibility and an increased vascular inflammation [47]. It has also been shown 
that high-normal BP state is associated with a cluster of CV and metabolic risk fac-
tors including an impaired glucose tolerance and dyslipidemia, conditions that are 
associated with neurogenic activation [48, 49]. Recent results based on non-invasive 
evaluation of structural characteristics of retinal microcirculation have shown that in 
high-normal BP state the alterations of microcirculatory patterns are of early appear -
ance in the clinical course of this condition and systolic BP and pulse pressure 
appear to be the major determinants of these structural changes. Data obtained from 
ambulatory BP monitoring have demonstrated the inverse relationship between 
night-time systolic BP and arteriolar/venular ratio suggesting the relevance of noc-
turnal BP overload for the microcirculatory vascular alterations [46]. The neuro-
genic influence to peripheral vessels is well documented in different districts. It 
consists of vasoconstriction that can selectively or differently increase peripheral 
vascular resistance maintaining or increasing BP values to allow organs to be ade-
quately perfused in circumstances in which perfusion is required [50, 51]. Removal 
of sympathetic activity is accompanied by an increase in arterial distensibility indi-
cating that sympathetic activity exerts an influence on the arterial function both in 
small and large vessels [51].
25.6.5  Brain Mechanisms
There is growing evidence to indicate that the link between hypertension and the 
brain may be bidirectional [52]. It has been suggested that essential hypertension 
may influence cerebral functioning early in its course or even that the brain regula-
tory dysfunction may be a cause of elevated BP [53]. This concept has been sup-
ported by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies linking exaggerated BP 
reactivity to altered brain activation patterns in response to psychological stress in 
normotensive subjects [54–56]. Very recently, a study which applied fMRI has dem-
onstrated that compensatory functional reorganization (neuroplasticity) in patients 
with established hypertension may precede structural brain damage [57]. Whether 
these functional changes are limited to overt clinical hypertension or they can be 
detected in the group of high-normotensive individuals remain to be elucidated.
Conclusions 
Prehypertensive state is characterized by chronic sympathetic activation, likely 
to contributing to disease progression, adverse CV events in this cohort and pre-
ceding the development of established hypertension. Although the transition 
from prehypertension to hypertension and the strong association with increased 
CV morbidity and mortality have been well documented, the initiation of BP 
lowering therapy is not considered in prehypertension, and it is not even recom-
mended in new-onset hypertension with low to moderate CV risk prior to at least 
3 months lifestyle modification. Given the alarming increase in the disease bur -
den, randomized clinical trials with prolonged observation are urgently needed 
to determine the effectiveness of antihypertensive therapy on CV outcomes 
patients, particularly in subjects with high-normal BP.25 The Role of the Brain in Neurogenic Prehypertension358
Acknowledgments  Conflict of Interest disclosures: none.
Each author does not have any personal or financial relationships that have any potential to 
inappropriately influence the manuscript; there are no financial or other potential conflicts of inter -
est including involvement with any organization with a direct financial, intellectual, or other inter -
est in the manuscript. In addition there are no grants and sources of financial support related to the 
topic of the manuscript.
The authors of this manuscript have certified that they comply with the Principles of Ethical 
Publishing.
References
 1. Julius S, Schork MA.  Borderline hypertension—a critical review. J Chronic Dis. 
1971;23:723–54.
 2. The sixth report of the Joint National Committee on prevention, detection, evaluation, and 
treatment of high blood pressure. Arch Intern Med. 1997;157:2413–46.
 3. Mancia G, De Backer G, Dominiczak A, et al. 2007 Guidelines for the management of arte-
rial hypertension: the task force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European 
Society of Hypertension (ESH) and the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). J Hypertens. 
2007;25:1105–87.
 4. Yamada Y , Miyajima E, Tochikubo O, Matsukawa T, Shionoiri H, Ishii M, Kaneko Y . Impaired 
baroreflex changes in muscle sympathetic nerve activity in adolescents who have a family his-
tory of essential hypertension. J Hypertens. 1988;6:S525–8.
 5. Davis JT, Rao F, Naqshbandi D, Fung MM, Zhang K, Schork AJ, Nievergelt CM, Ziegler MG, 
O’Connor DT. Autonomic and hemodynamic origins of prehypertension: central role of hered-
ity. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:2206–16.
 6. Zhang M, Ardile K, Wacholder S, Weich R, Chanock S, O’Brien TR. Genetic variations in CC 
chemokine receptors and hypertension. Am J Hypertens. 2006;19:67–72.
 7. Delles C, McBride MW, Graham D, Padmanabhan S, Dominiczak AF. Genetics of hyperten-
sion: from experimental animals to humans. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010;1802:1299–308.
 8. Hottenga JJ, Whitfield JB, de Geus EJ, Booms DI, Martin NG. Heritability and stability of 
resting blood pressure in Australia twins. Twin Res Hum Genet. 2006;9:205–9.
 9. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, Peto R, Collins R, Prospective Studies C. Age-specific 
relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for 
one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360(9349):1903–13.
 10. Qureshi AI, Suri MF, Kirmani JF, Divani AA, Mohammad Y . Is prehypertension a risk factor 
for cardiovascular diseases? Stroke. 2005;36(9):1859–63.
 11. Ninomiya T, Kubo M, Doi Y , Yonemoto K, Tanizaki Y , Tsuruya K, et  al. Prehypertension 
increases the risk for renal arteriosclerosis in autopsies: the Hisayama Study. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2007;18(7):2135–42.
 12. Wikstrom AK, Gunnarsdottir J, Nelander M, Simic M, Stephansson O, Cnattingius 
S. Prehypertension in pregnancy and risks of small for gestational age infant and stillbirth. 
Hypertension. 2016;67(3):640–6.
 13. Greenlund KJ, Croft JB, Mensah GA.  Prevalence of heart disease and stroke risk fac-
tors in persons with prehypertension in the United States, 1999–2000. Arch Intern Med. 
2004;164(19):2113–8.
 14. Julius S, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, Weber MA, Michelson EL, Kaciroti N, et al. Feasibility of treat-
ing prehypertension with an angiotensin-receptor blocker. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(16):1685–97.
 15. Egan BM, Julius S. Prehypertension: risk stratification and management considerations. Curr 
Hypertens Rep. 2008;10(5):359–66.
 16. Masuo K, Kawaguchi H, Mikami H, Ogihara T, Tuck ML. Serum uric acid and plasma nor -
epinephrine concentrations predict subsequent weight gain and blood pressure elevation. 
Hypertension. 2003;42(4):474–80.
G. Seravalle et al.359
 17. Hering D, Kara T, Kucharska W, Somers VK, Narkiewicz K. Longitudinal tracking of muscle 
sympathetic nerve activity and its relationship with blood pressure in subjects with prehyper -
tension. Blood Press. 2016;25(3):184–92.
 18. Seravalle G, Lonati L, Buzzi S, Cairo M, Quarti trevano F, Dell’Oro R, Facchetti R, Mancia 
G, Grassi G. Sympathetic nerve traffic and baroreflex function in optimal, normal, and high-
normal blood pressure states. J Hypertens. 2015;33:1411–7.
 19. Julius S, Feldstein CA.  Prehypertension: definitions, clinical significance and therapeutic 
approaches—to treat or not to treat? In: Berbari E, Mancia G, editors. Special issue on hyper -
tension: Springer-Verlag; 2012. p. 3–12.
 20. Smith PA, Graham LN, Mackintosh AF, Stoker JB, Mary DA. Sympathetic neural mechanisms 
in white-coat hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40:126–33.
 21. Grassi G, Seravalle G, Trevano FQ, Dell’Oro R, Bolla GB, Cuspidi C, et al. Neurogenic abnor -
malities in masked hypertension. Hypertension. 2007;50:537–42.
 22. Fagard RH, Stolarz K, Kuznestova T, Seidlerova J, Tikhonoff V , Grodzicki T, et al. Sympathetic 
activity assessed by power spectral analysis of heart rate variability in white-coat, masked and 
sustained hypertension versus true normotension. J Hypertens. 2007;25:2280–5.
 23. Pal GK, Adithan C, Dutta TK, Amudharaj D, Pravati P, Nandan PG, et  al. Assessment of 
sympathovagal imbalance by spectral analysis of heart rate variability in prehypertensive and 
hypertensive patients in Indian population. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2011;33:478–83.
 24. Grassi G, Esler M.  How to assess sympathetic activity in humnans. J Hypertens. 
1999;17:719–34.
 25. Grassi G, Vailati S, Bertinieri G, Seravalle G, Stella ML, Dell’Oro R, Mancia G. Heart rate as 
a marker of sympathetic activity. J Hypertens. 1998;16:1635–9.
 26. Flaa A, Eide IK, Kjeldsen SE, Rostrup M. Sympathoadrenal stress reactivity is a predictor of 
future blood pressure: an 18-year follow-up study. Hypertension. 2008;52:336–41.
 27. Wilkinson DJ, Thompson JM, Lambert GW, Jennings GL, Schwarz RG, Jefferys D, Turner 
AG, Esler MD. Sympathetic activity in patients with panic disorder at rest, under laboratory 
mental stress, and during panic attacks. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1998;55:511–20.
 28. Vasan R, Larson M, Leip E, Kannel W, Levy D. Assessment of frequency of progression to 
hypertension in non-hypertensive participants in the Framingham Heart Study: a cohort study. 
Lancet. 2001;358:1682–6.
 29. Ishikawa Y , Ishikawa J, Ishikawa S, Kayaba K, Nakamura Y , Shimada K, et al. Prevalence and 
determinants of prehypertension in a Japanese general population: the Jichi Medical School 
Cohort Study. Hypertens Res. 2008;31:1323–30.
 30. Tirosh A, Afek A, Rudich A, Percik R, Gordon B, Ayalon N, et al. Progression of normotensive 
adolescents to hypertensive adults. A study of 26980 teenagers. Hypertension. 2010;56:203–9.
 31. Barker DJ, Winter PD, Osmond C, Margetts B, Simmonds SJ. Weight in infancy and death 
from ischemic heart disease. Lancet. 1989;2:577–80.
 32. Heijzer-veen MG, Finken MJ, Nauta J, Dekker FW, Hille ET, Frolich M, et al. Is blood pres-
sure increased 19 years after intrauterine growth restriction and preterm birth? A prospective 
follow-up study in the Netherlands. Pediatrics. 2005;116:725–31.
 33. Grassi G, Seravalle G, Cattaneo BM, Bolla GB, Lanfranchi A, Colombo M, Giannattasio C, 
Brunani A, Cavagnini F, Mancia G. Sympathetic activation in obese normotensive subjects. 
Hypertension. 1995;25:560–3.
 34. Lund-Johansen P.  Hemodynamic in early essential hypertension. Acta Med Scand. 
1967;482:1–105.
 35. Frolich ED, Kozul VJ, Tarazi RC, Dustan HP. Physiological comparison of labile and essential 
hypertension. Circ Res. 1970;26:55–69.
 36. Julius S, Pascual A, Sannerstedt R, Mitchell C.  Relationship between cardiac output and 
peripheral resistance in borderline hypertension. Circulation. 1971;43:382–90.
 37. Takeshita A, Tanaka S, Kuroiwa A, Nakamura M. Reduced baroreceptor sensitivity in border -
line hepertension. Circulation. 1975;51:738–42.
 38. Eckberg DL. Carotid baroreflex function in young men with borderline blood pressure eleva-
tion. Circulation. 1979;59:632–6.25 The Role of the Brain in Neurogenic Prehypertension360
 39. Levy RL, White PD, Stroud WD, Hillman CC. Transient tachycardia: prognostic significance 
alone and in association with transient hypertension. JAMA. 1945;129:585–8.
 40. Trimarco B, V olpe M, Ricciardelli B, et al. Studies of the mechanisms underlying impairment 
of beta-adrenoceptor-mediated effects in human hypertension. Hypertension. 1983;5:584–90.
 41. Julius S, Randall OS, Esler MD, Kashima T, Ellis CN, Bennett J. Altered cardiac responsive-
ness and regulation in the normal cardiac output type of borderline hypertension. Circ Res. 
1975;36–37(Suppl. I):I-199–207.
 42. Folkow B. Physiological aspects of primary hypertension. Physiol Rev. 1982;62:347–503.
 43. Mulvany MJ, Hansen PK, Aalkjaer C. Direct evidence that the greater contractility of resis-
tance vessels in spontaneously hypertensive rats is associated with a narrowed lumen, a thick-
ened media, and an increased number of smooth muscle cell layer. Circ Res. 1978;43:854–64.
 44. Schiffrin EL. Remodeling of resistance arteries in essential hypertension and effects of antihy-
pertensive treatment. Am J Hypertens. 2004;17:1192–200.
 45. Izzard AS, Rizzoni D, Agabiti Rosei E, Heagerty AM. Small artery structure and hypertension: 
adaptative changes and target organ damage. J Hypertens. 2005;23:247–50.
 46. Grassi G, Buzzi S, Dell’Oro R, Mineo C, Dimitriadis K, Seravalle G, Lonati L, Cuspidi 
C. Structural alterations of the retinal microcirculation in the “prehypertensive” high-normal 
blood pressure state. Curr Pharmaceutical Des. 2013;19:2375–81.
 47. Psaty BM, Arnold AM, Olson J, et  al. Association between levels of blood pressure and 
measures of subclinical disease multiethnic study of atherosclerosis. Am J Hypertens. 
2006;19:1110–7.
 48. Haffner SM, Miettinen H, Gaskill SP, Stern MP. Metabolic precursors of hypertension. The 
San Antonio Heart Study. Arch Intern Med. 1996;156:1994–2001.
 49. Bo S, Gambino R, Gentile L, et al. High-normal blood pressure is associated with a clus-
ter of cardiovascular and metabolic risk factors: a population-based study. J Hypertens. 
2009;27:102–8.
 50. Mancia G, Luscher TF, Shepherd JT, Noll G, Grassi G. Cardiovascular regulation: basic con-
siderations. In: Willerson JT, Cohn JN, Wellens HJJ, Holmes Jr DR, editors. Cardiovascular 
medicine. London: Springer-Verlag; 2007. p. 1525–36.
 51. O’Rourke MF. Vascular impedance in studies of arterial and cardiac function. Physiol Rev. 
1982;62:570–623.
 52. Jennings JR, Zanstra Y .  Is the brain the essential in hypertension? Neuroimage. 
2009;47(3):914–21.
 53. Jennings JR, Heim AF. From brain to behavior: hypertension’s modulation of cognition and 
affect. Int J Hypertens. 2012;2012:701385.
 54. Gianaros PJ, Jennings JR, Sheu LK, Derbyshire SW, Matthews KA. Heightened functional 
neural activation to psychological stress covaries with exaggerated blood pressure reactivity. 
Hypertension. 2007;49(1):134–40.
 55. Gianaros PJ, Sheu LK, Remo AM, Christie IC, Crtichley HD, Wang J. Heightened resting 
neural activity predicts exaggerated stressor-evoked blood pressure reactivity. Hypertension. 
2009;53(5):819–25.
 56. Ryan JP, Sheu LK, Gianaros PJ. Resting state functional connectivity within the cingulate cor -
tex jointly predicts agreeableness and stressor-evoked cardiovascular reactivity. Neuroimage. 
2011;55(1):363–70.
 57. Naumczyk P, Sabisz A, Witkowska M, Graff B, Jodzio K, Gasecki D, et al. Compensatory 
functional reorganization may precede hypertension-related brain damage and cognitive 
decline: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. J Hypertens. 2017;35(6):1252–62.
G. Seravalle et al.Part IV
Risk Assessment in Prehypertension363 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_26
R. Erbel ( *) · N. Lehmann · A. Stang · S. Moebus · K.-H. Jöckel 
Institute for Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, University Hospital Essen, 
University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany
e-mail: erbel@uk-essen.de 
S. Churzidse 
Medizinische Klinik I, Herzzentrum Niederrhein, Helios Hospital Krefeld, Essen, Germany26Blood Pressure and Atherosclerosis: 
Subclinical Arteriosclerosis as an Early 
Sign of Organ Damage
Raimund Erbel, Nils Lehmann, Andreas Stang, 
Sofia Churzidse, Susanne Moebus, and Karl-Heinz Jöckel
The atherosclerotic continuum, as V Dzau [1, 2] described it, starts with endothe-
lium dysfunction leading to pathological vasomotion followed by early Stary stage 
I and II lesions, the so-called fatty streaks, followed by intermediate lesions, Stary 
III [3]. These first stages are regarded as normal aging process variants character -
ized by the accumulation of lipids in lipid droplets which form more and more a 
lipid core, creating an atheroma (Stary IV) [4]. With increasing collagen content the 
atheroma transforms to a fibroatheroma (Stary V).
The coronary artery remodeling process compensates for any luminal narrowing 
as long as the plaque area does not exceed 40% or 60%, when the vessel circumfer -
ence is measured according to pathological anatomical studies [5]. According to 
intravascular ultrasound studies the remodeling threshold for the plaque area can be 
regarded to be in the range of 45–50% [6–9].
The remodeling phenomenon, today called the Glagov phenomenon, is the main 
reason why luminograms like coronary angiography are not able to detect early 
signs of the vessel wall atherosclerosis [5, 6, 10, 11]. Other techniques like scintig-
raphy, echocardiography, as well as stress electrocardiography remain normal as 
long as the luminal narrowing is not limiting the coronary flow, meaning the myo-
cardial perfusion [12–16]. When the plaque size exceeds the critical level of 
40–50%, coronary angiography can detect some “wall irregularities,” often called 
“minor irregularities” or “nonsignificant” luminal changes. “Significant” coronary 
stenosis are defined as > 70–75% luminal narrowing in single plane and 90–95% 
stenosis in biplane quantitative coronary angiography with a minimal luminal 364
diameter of <1 mm (QCA) [17, 18]. In such lesions the plaque area exceeds 90% 
related to the vessel area. Even after successful percutaneous coronary interventions 
(PCI) plaque area remains to be >70% of the vessel size, when balloon angioplasty 
is used [19, 20].
Acute myocardial infarction, sudden death, and unstable angina are part of the acute 
coronary syndrome and seem to have an identical pathogenesis. Pathological-  
anatomical studies have shown that plaque rupture (65%) or erosion (35%) with repeti-
tive micro-emboli and resulting micro-infarcts are leading to the acute events [21, 22]. 
In few cases calcified noduli are found [23]. Depending on the degree of thrombus 
formation—mural or occlusive thrombi—non-ST segment or ST segment elevation 
infarction occurs. If the cardiac biomarkers remain normal, unstable angina is present.
If the lipid core in an eccentric plaque (atheroma or fibroatheroma) reaches 
>40% in a remodeled segment of an artery, a critical, vulnerable, state is reached, 
which is usually accompanied by a thinning of the fibrous cap to 60–80  μm or less, 
reduction of the content of smooth muscle cells but increase of macrophages in the 
fibrous cap, and neo-revascularization of the adventitia [21–24]. An additional fac-
tor has been identified, because plaque hemorrhage of vasa vasorum seems to sup-
port plaque progression and instability [25]. Plaque rupture and healing occur 
repetitively, can be subclinical and explain plaque progression [26]. Multiple signs 
of rupture and healing are frequently found in sudden death cases [26]. Plaque 
regression is, however, characterized by a reduction of the lipid content, core and 
increase of fibrotic tissue, a change of plaque composition [27].
Calcium is found first intracellulary, then extracellulary starting with Stary type 
III, reaching 10% of the plaque composition. Lipid part present another 10%, 
fibrotic tissue, however, 70%, and other tissue make up 10% [24]. Calcium in the 
coronary artery wall can be detected noninvasively, which is known since introduc-
tion of chest X-ray and fluoroscopy. Computed tomography (CT) allows not only 
the detection but also the localization and quantification of coronary artery calcifi-
cation (CAC) [28]. Thus, CT provides the best available noninvasive technique for 
detection of signs of subclinical coronary atherosclerosis, even before any symp-
toms occur due to luminal narrowing.
In the current presentation, the role of subclinical atherosclerosis measured by 
CT will be analyzed in the context of arterial hypertension based on the results of 
the Heinz Nixdorf Recall (HNR) study [29–32].
26.1  Coronary Artery Calcification
Previously electronic beam CT was used for CAC imaging worldwide replaced by 
advanced mechanical CT scanners with up to 624 rows. In the HNR study CAC was 
assessed from non-contrast enhanced EBCT scans, performed with a C-100 or C-150 
scanner (GE Imatron, South San Francisco, USA). Prospective ECG- triggering was 
done at 80% of the RR-interval [29]. Contiguous 3 mm thick slices from the pulmo-
nary bifurcation to the apex of the heart were obtained in both scans at an image 
acquisition time of 100 ms. CAC was defined as a focus of at least four contiguous 
pixels with a CT density ≥ 130 Hounsfield Units. This density is related to a density 
R. Erbel et al.365
factor between 1 and 4 (≥ 130–199, 200–299, 300–399, ≥ 400) and multiplied with 
the area of the plaque. The CAC Agatston score was computed by summing the CAC 
scores of all foci in the epicardial coronary system. The CT-related X-ray exposure 
could be measured previously and ranges from 1.0 to 1.3 mSv [33]. Thus, the low 
X-ray exposure allows the scanning even of healthy individuals, which was neces-
sary in order to obtain data for estimating the natural history and prevalence of CAC.
26.2  Natural History of CAC
The natural history of arteriosclerosis had previously been described in detail [27, 
34, 35]. First intracellular then extracellular calcium is a common sign and found 
not only in advanced atherosclerotic lesions but also in atheroma and fibroatheroma 
close to the lipid necrotic core, even in young individuals <50  years [34–36]. 
Typically, the first signs of coronary arteriosclerosis, indicated by plaque formation, 
are found 2–3  cm from the origin of both the left anterior descending coronary 
artery [34, 35]. Aging is indicated by the progression of the disease leading to 
plaque formation also in the distal part of the left anterior descending and circum-
flex arteries, which was not observed in the same degree in the right coronary artery 
[35]. Also by coronary angiography including patients with multiple lesions and an 
average three vessel disease lesions are found in the proximal left artery descending 
coronary artery followed by the right coronary artery [37, 38]. The natural history 
of coronary artery sclerosis can be assessed by EBCT in more details, as CAC is 
part of the vessel wall, whereas angiography is only a luminogram [39–41].
26.3  Prevalence of Coronary Artery Calcification
Already early, it became obvious that coronary artery calcification increases in an 
exponential curvature related to age in each gender as the population-based cohort 
of the Heinz Nixdorf Recall Study demonstrated in 4487 participants at the age of 
45–75 years [42]. In an Army study, CAC was already found in men at the age of 
40–45 years [43]. Very different results were reported, when a cohort of patients 
with or without symptoms were recruited [42]. The age- and sex-related CAC dis-
tribution is very comparable in different cohorts, even in different countries and 
continents as the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis (MESA) demonstrated, 
which included 6814 participants at the age of 45–80 years [44]. The results are 
astonishing, as the distribution of risk factors were strikingly different [45]. 
Meanwhile three observational studies have presented their results: the Heinz 
Nixdorf Recall study, the MESA, and the Rotterdam study with very similar results 
in Caucasian participants [44– 47]. The percentile distribution of CAC is, however, 
different in other ethnicities [48, 49], as recently the MESA study confirmed [50].
These percentiles of CAC distribution can be used in order to estimate the indi-
vidual vascular age, www.recall-Studie.uni-Essen.de, www.mesa-nhlbi.org [41].
Individual CAC values can be compared to this percentile distribution and 
the difference used to estimate the “vascular age” [41, 44, 45, 51]. In Fig.  26.1 
26 Blood Pressure and Atherosclerosis366
Age /years50 40 60 70 805001,0001,5002,0002,500
0Median CAC/ Agatston scoreCAC Distribution dependent on Age for Men
40 50 60 70 80
Age /years2004006008001,000
0CAC Distribution dependent on Age for WomenMedian CAC/ Agatston scoret0: median fit
t0: median
t1: median fit
t1: mediant0: 75. PCTL fit
t0: 75. PCTL
t1: 75. PCTL fit
t1: 75. PCTL
t0: 90. PCTL fit
t0: 90. PCTL
t1: 90. PCTL fit
t1: 90. PCTLa
b
t0: median fit
t0: median
t1: median fit
t1: mediant0: 75. PCTL fit
t0: 75. PCTL
t1: 75. PCTL fit
t1: 75. PCTL
t0: 90. PCTL fit
t0: 90. PCTL
t1: 90. PCTL fit
t1: 90. PCTL
Fig. 26.1 (a) Empirical and estimated 50th, 75th, and 90th percentile of the CAC distribution for 
men by age categories [52]. In black for the baseline values (t0), when the participants (1633 men) 
were aged between 45 and 74 years, and in red for the 5-year follow-up data (t1), when the cohort 
was aged 50–79 years. Note the exponential shape of the increase of CAC. Dots represent empiri-
cal percentile values for each 5-year age categories, lines show linear quantile regression on a log 
scale after retransformation. (b) Empirical and estimated 50th, 75th, and 90th percentile of the 
CAC distribution for men by age categories. In black for the baseline values (t0), when the partici-
pants (1848 women) were aged between 45 and 74 years, and in red for the 5-year follow-up data 
(t1), when the cohort was aged 50–79  years. Note the exponential shape of the increase of 
CAC. Dots represent empirical percentile values for each 5-year age categories, lines show linear 
quantile regression on a log scale after retransformation. The y-axis range in (a, b) differ by a fac-
tor of 2.5 in men compared to women [52]
R. Erbel et al.367
percentile distribution is shown for men and women, based on the 5 years follow-
up data of the HNR study [52]. The follow-up data show in comparison to the 
baseline data a shift along the given CAC distribution for 5 years without los-
ing the exponential baseline curvature [52]. Based on these analyses a prediction 
of CAC progression became possible allowing the comparison to the observed 
change that means a rated CAC progression could differentiate into a progression 
as predicted, but also into a slow and rapid CAC progression for those showing 
lower or higher values than predicted [53]. For calculation an App is presented at 
“CAC Progression.”
26.4  Influence of Risk Factors on Coronary  
Artery Calcification
Traditional and nontraditional cardiovascular risk factors are associated with 
coronary atherosclerosis. The top four factors are smoking, hypercholesterol-
emia, diabetes, and hypertension, since the first description by the Framingham 
study in 1961.
Smoking seems to have a strong influence on CAC and is associated with 
enhanced CAC yielding a vascular age increase of about 10  years in men and 
women. For ex-smokers this effect is smaller and reduced to 5 years in men and 
2–3 years in women [53, 54]. Passive smoking showed a significant association, too, 
but this association was is weak [55].
In addition to smoking hyperlipidemia plays a major role and is of great interest, 
because new medication has been developed to reduce the cholesterol and LDL-  
cholesterol (LDL-C) level even below 160 and 70 mg/dL, respectively. Elevated 
levels of total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol are associated with excessive calci-
fication of coronary arteries. The association between CAC and LDL-C is more 
pronounced in women than in men [56]. Women with an LDL-cholesterol below 
100 mg/dL show nearly no calcification during life, whereas women with an LDL-  
cholesterol >190  mg/dL demonstrate an excessive calcification process, which 
starts already very early between 40 and 50 years and yields a vasculature age dif-
ference of 17 years [56]. In men the difference is only 4.5 years [56]. However, 
men with LDL-C have already at the age of 45 years a higher CAC level. The signs 
of coronary arteriosclerosis give a nice opportunity to analyze whether or not other 
parameters of the lipoprotein metabolism may improve the association to CAC 
compared to LDL-C. Apo B shows the highest association to CAC in comparison 
to all other tested lipoprotein parameters even compared to lipoprotein (a). Neither 
the ratio LDL-C/HDL-C, nor Apo B/Apo-A1 or non HDL-C yielded stronger asso-
ciations compared to Apo B or LDL-C. However, the difference to LDL-C is quite 
small, so that in the clinical field LDL-C remains the most important risk factor for 
characterizing hyperlipidemia. The association to triglyceride levels was only 
week and only positive for the highest quartile compared to the lowest in men and 
women [41, 56].
The age- and sex-dependent distribution of CAC is steeper in those with predia-
betes and even more in those with known diabetes mellitus. Again the association 
26 Blood Pressure and Atherosclerosis368
for women is more impressive than for men. The vascular age is 13 years higher in 
those with compared to those without diabetes and 4 years for those with prediabe-
tes. In men the difference is for diabetes 4 years but for prediabetes no difference in 
relation to the CAC distribution can be detected.
26.5  Influence of Hypertension on Coronary Artery 
Calcification
Recent years have demonstrated that high blood pressure (BP) is one of the most 
important risk factors related to cardiovascular mortality including stroke, myocar -
dial infarction, heart failure, aortic diseases, and renal failure [57–59]. The 7th and 
8th Joint National Committee on Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High 
Blood Pressure have changed the recommendation of treatment and differ in this 
respect to the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) statements [59, 60]. Parallel 
to the new 8th JNC recommendation the American Heart Association and American 
College of Cardiology published the use of a new ASCVD (atherosclerotic cardio-
vascular disease) score for assessment of CV risk [61]. In addition to the discussion 
of BP thresholds used for treatment [57, 60, 62], both the ESC and the ACC/AHA 
recommendation do use the information about organ damage as an important sign 
of the disease classification already in a subclinical state, but both discuss or nearly 
neglect the use of CAC in order to detect signs of organ damage at the coronary 
artery level [63, 64]. However, in the ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of blood 
cholesterol to reduce CV risk in adults, a CAC level >300 is recommended to be 
used for reclassification of individuals with LDL-C between 70 and 189  mg/
dL.  CAC is recommended in order to improve the clinician–patient discussion, 
when the ASCVD score is ≥7.5% or 5–7.5%, if a diabetes is present <40 years or 
LDL <70 mg/dL, or when the patient is p > 75 years [63].
As we described earlier [31], epidemiological data show that coronary event 
rates are highest in those with hypertension, intermediate in those with prehyperten-
sion, also called borderline or high normal blood pressure (BP), and lowest in those 
with normal BP [65–70]. The most common first major events after hypertension 
onset are hard ischemic heart disease events with acute myocardial infarction and 
unstable angina in a continuous graded manner with no indication of a critical value 
[71, 72]. But still a controversy exists whether or not prehypertension can be 
regarded as a disease entity and should be treated. However, in prehypertension, 
even an impaired repair capacity of endothelial progenitor cells could be demon-
strated [73] as well as retinal vessel narrowing [54] and increased intima-media 
thickness or even increase of left ventricular mass [75].
In children studied between the age 8 and 18 years and followed until the age of 
29–37 years the prevalence of CAC was 30% in men and 10% in women [76]. The 
risk for CAC was highest for systolic BP in the stepwise multiple logistic regression 
analysis and higher than for body mass index, HDL-C, and LDL-C. This corre-
sponds to the report of MESA showing that in incidental hypertension CAC can be 
regarded as a direct sign of target organ damage of the coronary arteries [77]. 
R. Erbel et al.369
However, previous studies failed to demonstrate that treatment of prehypertension 
can be recommended, but demonstrated that it may be more harmful and risky than 
non-pharmacologic interventions [78–80].
In the HNR study we studied the influence of blood pressure on CAC and tested 
the association with outcome data of coronary and CV events [31]. We could 
include 4181 cases between 45 and 75 years between 2000 and 2003, who were 
followed for 7.18 years (median; Q1–Q3: 6.98–8.24 years). Hard coronary events 
were defined as fatal and nonfatal myocardial infarction, cardiovascular events as 
stroke and coronary revascularization. Details on the blood pressure measurements 
were published previously [81]. Trained technicians took three blood pressure 
measurements with an automated oscillometric blood pressure device (Omron, 
HEM-705CP, OMRON Corporation, Hoofdrop, The Netherlands), with appropri-
ate 14 or 16 cm cuff sizes and the participants in the sitting position. The mean of 
the second and third value of three measurements, recorded with a 3 min interval, 
was taken in accordance to the Joint National Committee for Prevention Detection 
and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC 7) guidelines [59]. Participants with 
systolic/diastolic BP <120/<80  mmHg were categorized as normotensive. 
Prehypertension was defined as systolic BP 120–139  mmHg or diastolic BP 
80–89  mmHg. Hypertension was defined as systolic or diastolic BP ≥ 140 or 
≥90 mmHg, respectively, and subdivided in stage 1 hypertension with either sys-
tolic BP 140–159 mmHg or diastolic BP 90–99 mmHg and stage 2 hypertension 
with either systolic or diastolic BP ≥ 160 or ≥ 100 mmHg. Participants were asked 
to bring their medication in order to verify if antihypertensive medication was used 
in order to validate some answers in the questionnaire concerning presence of 
hypertension. Only if antihypertensive medication was verified, we categorized 
these participants as in hypertension stage 2 [31].
Already prehypertensive participants showed higher prevalence of risk factors. 
Hypertensive subjects were older, showed higher BMIs and higher cholesterol and 
triglyceride levels. Prevalence of diabetes increased as well. The Framingham score 
increased in men from 9.4 ± 5.2 in normotensives to 19.2 ± 5.3% in stage 2 and in 
women from 3.6 ± 2.0 to 9.7 ± 5.3%. During follow-up of 7.18 years 2.8% (n = 115) 
experienced coronary and 3.6% (n = 152) CV events. The time to events decreased 
in the higher BP categories. This effect was higher for CV than coronary events 
(Figs.  26.2 and 26.3). In comparison to normotensives, the hazard ratios for the 
combined endpoint were 1.43 (95%CI 0.82–2.50), P = 0.21 for prehypertensives, 
1.52 (95%CI 0.85–2.73), P  =  0.16 for stage 1, and 2.63 (95%CI 1.57–4.43), 
P = 0.0003 for stage 2 hypertensives.
The association between age and CAC scores was strongly dependent on BP 
categories, but more in women than men (Fig.  26.4). Prehypertensive women had 
increased CAC score compared to normotensives, which was not obvious in men, 
but men had roughly a five times higher amount of CAC.
In men, CAC was already found in hypertension stage 2 at the age of 45 years, in 
women at the age of 50 years, which seems to be related to the lower frequency of 
hypertension in women compared to men until 45 years of age [82]. Additionally, 
the prevalence and severity of hypertension increase with age in women, so that 
26 Blood Pressure and Atherosclerosis370
beyond 60 years, the majority of women have stage 2 hypertension or receive anti-
hypertensive agents [82, 83]. When CAC is used to estimate “arterial age” [51, 54, 
56], it is about 15 years higher in stage 2 hypertensive women than in normotensive 
women, that is, normotensive women reach any given CAC score many years later 
than women with stage 2 hypertension. But even for prehypertension and hyperten-
sion stage 1, differences of 7–10 years could be demonstrated. In men, however, the 
Coronary Event Rate
00.020.040.060.080.10
00.020.040.060.080.10
04 68 10 20 46 81 0 2Coronary Event Rates
Log-rank p=0.009 f or trend Log-rank p=0.013 f or trendWomen Men
JNC 7
blood pressure normal Pre-h ypertension Stage 1 Stage 2
Fig. 26.2 Kaplan-Meier curves of primary coronary events defined as fatal and nonfatal myocar -
dial infarction in JNC 7 blood pressure categories [31]
04 68 10 20 46 81 0 2Cardiov ascular Event RateCardiovascular Event Rates
Years YearsLog-rank p<0.0001 for trend Log-rank p<0.0001 for trendWomen Men
00.020.040.060.080.10
00.020.040.060.080.10
JNC 7
blood pressurenormal Stage 1 Stage 2 Pre-h ypertensio n
Fig. 26.3 Kaplan-Meier curves of primary cardiovascular events defined as stroke and coronary 
revascularization in JNC 7 blood pressure categories [31]
R. Erbel et al.371
differences between the different BP categories were not as striking, but still the 
estimated vascular age in normotensives was lower than in hypertensives. This may 
reflect that CAC in men is stronger influenced by other risk factors than BP alone 
including particularly smoking [84]. Smoking was much more prevalent in men 
than in women, while in women >60 years smoking also increases systolic BP [85]. 
CAC percentile distributions in men and women were similar for smokers, former 
smokers, and never smokers [54]. Yet, men and women with diabetes, prediabetes, 
and no diabetes showed a similar CAC distribution of percentiles as in this study for 
BP. This may reflect that CAC in men is stronger influenced by other risk factors 
than BP alone including particularly smoking [84]. This supports the hypothesis 
that the higher prevalence of current and former smoking in men compared to 
women may be the reason for the observed different distribution of CAC percen-
tiles. It presents a typical biological bias [31].
For the total cohort, the factor of increase in (CAC+1) with 10 mmHg systolic BP 
was very similar in men and women, that is, 1.14 (95%CI: 1.09–1.21), p  < 0.0001 
and 1.13 (95%CI: 1.09–1.18), p  < 0.0001, respectively, in a full adjusted model [31]. 
The adjusted HRs (full model using age, sex, diabetes, LDL-C and HDL-C, former 
and present smoking, lipid-lowering medication, and BMI) for the combined end-
point in comparison to persons without CAC were 1.68 (95%CI 0.90–3.15) for CAC 
>0–99, 3.09 (95%CI 1.63–5.86) for CAC = 100–399, 7.20 (7.80–13.63) for CAC 
≥400, 1.16 (95%CI 1.03–1.29) for 5 years of age, and 1.61 (95%CI 1.08–2.41) for 
diabetes. In this model presence of lipid-lowering therapy showed no sizeable impact 
with a HR of 0.93 (95%CI 0.59–1.42), P   =  0.68. Figure  26.5 presents in a 
JNC 7
blood pressurenormal Pre-hypertension Stage 1 Stage 2Age /years300
200
100
0400 100
80
60
40
20
0Coronary artery calcification score
Male participants
normotensive
stage 1
prehypertensive
stage 2normotensive
stage 1
prehypertensive
stage 2Female participant sMedian CAC Median CAC
40 50 60 70 80 40 50 60 70 80
Age /years
Fig. 26.4 Association of CAC scores with age stratified by JNC 7 blood pressure categories 
in men and women. Note that the CAC score in normotensive women increases only slightly 
with age, whereas in prehypertensives and hypertensives a steeper increase with age was 
observed [31]
26 Blood Pressure and Atherosclerosis372
three-dimensional scheme the influence of BP level and CAC score on the event 
rates. It can be seen that the main influence seems to be the CAC and not the BP level 
itself.
26.6  CAC Progression and Blood Pressure
Once CAC is found, it will increase over time in an inevitable manner along a given 
exponential curvature [52]. Related to the baseline measurement the CAC progres-
sion can be predicted and compared to the observed increase [53]. In a recent analy-
sis it could be demonstrated that systolic blood pressure in addition to smoking and 
LDL-C were independent predictors of CAC onset during a follow-up time of 
5 years [53]. Currently it is not known if CAC progression adds to our understand-
ing of the influence of risk factors upon outcome.
26.7  Association of Blood Pressure and Outcome 
Dependent on CAC
The degree of CAC seems to be an excellent prognostic marker for coronary and 
cardiovascular events [30, 86, 87]. Thresholds of CAC 100 and CAC 400 represent 
typical levels which correspond to increased and high risk. Interestingly enough, we 
found a stronger association between BP and secondary than primary endpoints 
despite strong associations of BP to CAC. This is in line with previous epidemio-
logic observations showing that hypertension was the most important risk factor in 
77% of persons with incidental strokes and in 69% of those with incidental myocar -
dial infarction [88]. The increase in HRs within CAC score categories with 
010203040
01-99normalpre-hypertensionstage 1stage 2
100-399≥400
CAC Score
JNC7 CategoriesAdjusted Hazard Ratios
1.0****
****
*
***Fig. 26.5 Adjusted hazard 
ratios of the combined 
endpoint (fatal and 
nonfatal myocardial 
infarction, stroke and 
coronary revascularization) 
stratified by CAC score 
categories and JNC 7 
blood pressure categories 
with normotensives with 
no CAC as the reference 
category [59]. *Indicates 
significant difference from 
reference
R. Erbel et al.373
increasing BP is modest, as has been pointed out, except for the increase in risk in 
cases with stage 2 hypertension (Fig.  26.4). However, within each BP category, the 
adjusted HRs of the combined coronary and CV endpoints increased by the amount 
of CAC [31]. The time to events decreased with increasing CAC score categories 
even among prehypertensives with a gradual and strong relationship of risk with the 
degree of CAC (Fig.  26.6). In persons with hypertension, that is, stage 1 and stage 
2, HRs for the combined endpoint in comparison to persons without CAC were 1.96 
(95%CI 1.06–3.63), P = 0.03 for CAC 1–99, 3.46 (95%CI 1.84–6.49), P = 0.0001 
for CAC 100–399, and 7.55 (95%CI 4.03–14.15), P <0.0001 for CAC ≥400 (model 
2, full adjustment). Adjusting this relation between CAC and events in hyperten-
sives (stage 1 and 2) further with respect to age, sex, diabetes, LDL-C and HDL-C, 
former and present smoking, lipid-lowering medication, and BMI confirmed these 
results. HRs were 1.68 (95%CI 0.90–3.15) for CAC = 0–99, 3.09 (95%CI 1.63–
5.86) for CAC = 100–399, 7.20 (7.80–13.63) for CAC ≥400, 1.16 (95%CI 1.03–
1.29) for 5 years of age, and 1.61 (95%CI 1.08–2.41) for diabetes.
 Conclusion
Our data suggest that coronary atherosclerosis measured by CT as a marker of 
target organ damage might be considered for further risk stratification. This applies 
particularly to persons with prehypertension where the clinical significance of 
04 68 10 2Combined Coronary an d
Cardiov ascular Ev ent Rate
00.150.200.250.30
0.050.10
Time/y ears1.02.05 (0.80-5.23)3.12 (1.10-8.85)7.72 (2.67-22.27 )
Adjusted HR (95%CI)
(Full Model)Log-rank p<0.0001 for trend
CAC category 0 1-99 100-399 >400
Fig. 26.6 Kaplan-Meier curves of the combined endpoints (fatal and nonfatal myocardial infarc-
tion, stroke and revascularization) in prehypertensives only, stratified by CAC score categories [31]
26 Blood Pressure and Atherosclerosis374
antihypertensive medication is controversial. Atherosclerosis imaging may help to 
guide lifestyle modification and pharmaco-therapeutic therapy to reduce coronary 
and cardiovascular morbidity and mortality [88]. Interestingly enough, we found a 
stronger association between BP and secondary than primary endpoints despite 
strong associations of BP to CAC.  This is in line with previous epidemiologic 
observations showing that hypertension was the most important risk factor in 77% 
of persons with incidental strokes and in 69% of those with incidental myocardial 
infarction [89]. The relationship between BP, CAC, and endpoints is supported by 
previous cross-sectional analyses from MESA and HNR demonstrating that BP 
was a main determinant of CAC [45]. Similarly, a recent meta-analysis in 73,913 
patients demonstrated for intensive blood pressure reduction a positive effect for 
stroke but not for myocardial infarction in diabetics [90]. Ischemic coronary artery 
disease based on luminal narrowing can be regarded as a direct consequence of 
coronary atherosclerosis, and CAC has a high correlation to total plaque burden 
[91]. Thus, on one hand a strong association with revascularization can be expected, 
on the other hand a weaker association with coronary events, because the underly-
ing process is not directly related to CAC, but to erosion and plaque rupture of thin 
cap fibrous atheroma, as visualized at autopsy [25].
CT scans represent the noninvasive method of choice for detection of CAC, 
which represents a typical sign of subclinical coronary artery disease. For either sex, 
the amount of CAC increases with an exponential curvature. Risk factor analysis 
reaches an explained variance of up to 25–30%. That means a great part of the pro-
cess seems to be genetically determined and heritable, with a strong influence of 
ethnicity. Systolic blood pressure has been identified as the strongest predictor of 
CAC in children followed until the young adulthood. The amount of CAC increases 
depending on the blood pressure level. Between normotensives and hypertension 
stage 2 a striking difference was found, which was more obvious in women than 
men. Even in prehypertensives a higher CAC distribution was found in both men 
and women. In men a biological bias in the elderly was found. The degree of CAC 
was associated with higher coronary and cardiovascular events in each blood pres-
sure category. Compared to the blood pressure categories the CAC values were 
much more predictive of events, even in prehypertensives. This coronary sign of 
subclinical atherosclerosis may be used in the future to preselect those who would 
benefit from pharmaceutic intervention and avoid treatment in others. Meanwhile, 
McEvoy JW et al. have proposed CAC as a guide for a personalized risk-based 
approach to initiation and intensification of antihypertensive therapy [92].
References
 1. Dzau VJ, Antman EM, Black HR, Hayes DL, Manson JE, Plutzky J, Popma JJ, Stevenson 
W. The cardiovascular disease continuum validated: clinical evidence of improved patient out-
comes: part I: pathophysiology and clinical trial evidence (risk factors through stable coronary 
artery disease). Circulation. 2006;114(25):2850–70.
 2. Dzau VJ, Antman EM, Black HR, Hayes DL, Manson JE, Plutzky J, Popma JJ, Stevenson 
W.  The cardiovascular disease continuum validated: clinical evidence of improved patient 
R. Erbel et al.375
outcomes: part II: clinical trial evidence (acute coronary syndromes through renal disease) and 
future directions. Circulation. 2006;114(25):2871–91.
 3. Stary HC, Chandler AB, Glagov S, Guyton JR, Insull W Jr, Rosenfeld ME, Schaffer SA, 
Schwartz CJ, Wagner WD, Wissler RW. A definition of initial, fatty streak, and intermediate 
lesions of atherosclerosis. A report from the Committee on Vascular Lesions of the Council on 
Arteriosclerosis, American Heart Association. Circulation. 1994;89(5):2462–78.
 4. Stary HC, Chandler AB, Dinsmore RE, Fuster V , Glagov S, Insull W Jr, Rosenfeld ME, 
Schwartz CJ, Wagner WD, Wissler RW.  A definition of advanced types of atherosclerotic 
lesions and a histological classification of atherosclerosis. A report from the Committee on 
Vascular Lesions of the Council on Arteriosclerosis, American Heart Association. Circulation. 
1995;92(5):1355–74.
 5. Glagov S, Weisenberg E, Zarins CK, Stankunavicius R, Kolettis GJ. Compensatory enlarge-
ment of human atherosclerotic coronary arteries. N Engl J Med. 1987;316(22):1371–5.
 6. Ge J, Erbel R, Zamorano J, Koch L, Kearney P, Görge G, Gerber T, Meyer J. Coronary artery 
remodeling in atherosclerotic disease: an intravascular ultrasonic study in vivo. Coron Artery 
Dis. 1993;4:981–6.
 7. Gerber TC, Erbel R, Görge G, Ge J, Rupprecht HJ, Meyer J. Extent of atherosclerosis and 
remodeling of the left main coronary artery determined by intravascular ultrasound. Am J 
Cardiol. 1994;73:666–71.
 8. von Birgelen C, Mintz GS, de Vrey EA, Serruys PW, Kimura T, Nobuyoshi M, Popma JJ, Leon 
MB, Erbel R, de Feyter PJ. Preintervention lesion remodelling affects operative mechanisms 
of balloon optimised directional coronary atherectomy procedures: a volumetric study with 
three dimensional intravascular ultrasound. Heart. 2000;83(2):192–7.
 9. Hartmann M, von Birgelen C, Mintz GS, Verhorst PM, Erbel R. Relation between baseline 
plaque burden and subsequent remodelling of atherosclerotic left main coronary arteries: a 
serial intravascular ultrasound study with long-term (> or =12 months) follow-up. Eur Heart J. 
2006;27(15):1778–84.
 10. Isner JM, Kishel J, Kent KM, Ronan JA Jr, Ross AM, Roberts WC. Accuracy of angiographic 
determination of left main coronary arterial narrowing. Angiographic—histologic correlative 
analysis in 28 patients. Circulation. 1981;63(5):1056–64.
 11. Erbel R, Ge J, Bockisch A, Kearney P, Görge G, Haude M, Schümann D, Zamorano J, 
Rupprecht HJ, Meyer J. Value of intracoronary ultrasound and Doppler in the differentiation 
of angiographically normal coronary arteries: a prospective study in patients with angina pec-
toris. Eur Heart J. 1996;17(6):880–9.
 12. Gould KL. Noninvasive assessment of coronary stenoses by myocardial imaging during coro-
nary vasodilation. Part I physiologic principles and experimental validation. Am J Cardiol. 
1978;41:267–78.
 13. Gould KL, Schelbert HR, Phelps ME, Hoffman EJ.  Noninvasive assessment of coronary 
stenoses with myocardial perfusion imaging during pharmacologic coronary vasodilatation. 
V . Detection of 47 percent diameter coronary stenosis with intravenous nitrogen-13 ammonia 
and emission-computed tomography in intact dogs. Am J Cardiol. 1979;43(2):200–8.
 14. Gould KL, Schelbert H, Phelps M, Hoffman E.  Noninvasive assessment of coronary ste-
noses by myocardial perfusion imaging during pharmacologic coronary vasodilation. Part 
V . Detection of 47% diameter coronary stenosis with intravenous 13NH4+ and emission com-
puted tomography in intact dogs. Am J Cardiol. 1979;43:200–8.
 15. Gould KL, Kirkeeide RL, Buchi M. Coronary flow reserve as a physiologic measure of steno-
sis severity. Part I. Relative and absolute coronary flow reserve during changing aortic pressure 
and cardiac workload and Part II determination from arteriographic stenosis dimensions under 
standardized conditions. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1990;15:459–74.
 16. Gould KL, Johnson NP, Bateman TM, Beanlands RS, Bengel FM, Bober R, Camici PG, 
Cerqueira MD, Chow BJ, Di Carli MF, Dorbala S, Gewirtz H, Gropler RJ, Kaufmann PA, 
Knaapen P, Knuuti J, Merhige ME, Rentrop KP, Ruddy TD, Schelbert HR, Schindler TH, 
Schwaiger M, Sdringola S, Vitarello J, Williams KA Sr, Gordon D, Dilsizian V , Narula 
J. Anatomic versus physiologic assessment of coronary artery disease. Role of coronary flow 
26 Blood Pressure and Atherosclerosis376
reserve, fractional flow reserve, and positron emission tomography imaging in revasculariza-
tion decision-making. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62(18):1639–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jacc.2013.07.076.
 17. McMahon MM, Brown BG, Cukingnan R, Rolett EL, Bolson E, Frimer M, Dodge 
HT. Quantitative coronary angiography: measurement of the “critical” stenosis in patients with 
unstable angina and single-vessel disease without collaterals. Circulation. 1979;60(1):106–13.
 18. Wijns W, Serruys PW, Reiber JH, van den Brand M, Simoons ML, Kooijman CJ, Balakumaran 
K, Hugenholtz PG. Quantitative angiography of the left anterior descending coronary artery: 
correlations with pressure gradient and results of exercise thallium scintigraphy. Circulation. 
1985;71(2):273–9.
 19. Gerber TC, Erbel R, Görge G, Ge J, Rupprecht HJ, Meyer J. Classification of morphologic 
effects of percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty assessed by intravascular ultra-
sound. Am J Cardiol. 1992;70(20):1546–54.
 20. Görge G, Haude M, Ge J, V oegele E, Gerber T, Rupprecht HJ, Meyer J, Erbel R. Intravascular 
ultrasound after low and high inflation pressure coronary artery stent implantation. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1995;26(3):725–30.
 21. Falk E, Shah PK, Fuster V . Coronary plaque disruption. Circulation. 1995;92(3):657–71.
 22. Davies MJ, Bland JM, Hangartner JR, Angelini A, Thomas AC. Factors influencing the pres-
ence or absence of acute coronary artery thrombi in sudden ischaemic death. Eur Heart J. 
1989;10(3):203–8.
 23. Virmani R, Kolodgie FD, Burke AP, Farb A, Schwartz SM. Lessons from sudden coronary 
death: a comprehensive morphological classification scheme for atherosclerotic lesions. 
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000;20(5):1262–75.
 24. Friedewald VE, Ambrose JA, Stone GW, Roberts WC, Willerson JT. The editor’s roundta-
ble: the vulnerable plaque. Am J Cardiol. 2008;102(12):1644–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
amjcard.2008.09.001.
 25. Virmani R, Kolodgie FD, Burke AP, Finn A V , Gold HK, Tulenko TN, Wrenn SP, Narula 
J. Atherosclerotic plaque progression and vulnerability to rupture: angiogenesis as a source of 
intraplaque hemorrhage. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2005;25(10):2054–61.
 26. Burke AP, Kolodgie FD, Farb A, Weber DK, Malcom GT, Smialek J, Virmani R.  Healed 
plaque ruptures and sudden coronary death: evidence that subclinical rupture has a role in 
plaque progression. Circulation. 2001;103(7):934–40.
 27. Stary HC. The development of calcium deposits in atherosclerotic lesions and their persistence 
after lipid regression. Am J Cardiol. 2001;88:16E–9E.
 28. Agatston AS, Janowitz WR, Hildner FJ, Zusmer NR, Viamonte M Jr, Detrano R. Quantification 
of coronary artery calcium using ultrafast computed tomography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1990;15(4):827–32.
 29. Schmermund A, Möhlenkamp S, Stang A, Grönemeyer D, Seibel R, Hirche H, Mann K, 
Siffert W, Lauterbach K, Siegrist J, Jöckel KH, Erbel R. Assessment of clinically silent ath-
erosclerotic disease and established and novel risk factors for predicting myocardial infarc-
tion and cardiac death in healthy middle-aged subjects: rationale and design of the Heinz 
Nixdorf RECALL Study. Risk factors, evaluation of coronary calcium and lifestyle. Am Heart 
J. 2002;144(2):212–8.
 30. Erbel R, Möhlenkamp S, Moebus S, Schmermund A, Lehmann N, Stang A, Dragano N, 
Grönemeyer D, Seibel R, Kälsch H, Bröcker-Preuss M, Mann K, Siegrist J, Jöckel KH, Heinz 
Nixdorf Recall Study Investigative Group. Coronary risk stratification, discrimination, and 
reclassification improvement based on quantification of subclinical coronary atherosclero-
sis: the Heinz Nixdorf Recall study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56(17):1397–406. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jacc.2010.06.030.
 31. Erbel R, Lehmann N, Möhlenkamp S, Churzidse S, Bauer M, Kälsch H, Schmermund A, 
Moebus S, Stang A, Roggenbuck U, Bröcker-Preuss M, Dragano N, Weimar C, Siegrist 
J, Jöckel KH, Heinz Nixdorf Recall Study Investigators. Subclinical coronary athero-
sclerosis predicts cardiovascular risk in different stages of hypertension: result of the 
R. Erbel et al.377
Heinz Nixdorf Recall Study. Hypertension. 2012;59(1):44–53. https://doi.org/10.1161/
HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.180489.
 32. Lehmann N, Erbel R, Mahabadi AA, Kälsch H, Möhlenkamp S, Moebus S, Stang A, 
Roggenbuck U, Strucksberg KH, Führer-Sakel D, Dragano N, Budde T, Seibel R, Grönemeyer 
D, Jöckel KH, Investigators HNRS. Accelerated progression of coronary artery calcification 
in hypertension but also prehypertension. J Hypertens. 2016;34(11):2233–42. https://doi.
org/10.1097/HJH.0000000000001080.
 33. Hunold P, V ogt FM, Schmermund A, Debatin JF, Kerkhoff G, Budde T, Erbel R, Ewen K, 
Barkhausen J. Radiation exposure during cardiac CT: effective doses at multi-detector row CT 
and electron-beam CT. Radiology. 2003;226(1):145–52.
 34. Montenegro MR, Eggen DA.  Topography of atherosclerosis in the coronary arteries. Lab 
Invest. 1968;18:586–93.
 35. Strong JP. Atherosclerotic lesions. Natural history, risk factors, and topography. Arch Pathol 
Lab Med. 1992;116:1268–75.
 36. Schmermund A, Schwartz RS, Adamzik M, Sangiorgi G, Pfeifer EA, Rumberger JA, Burke AP, 
Farb A, Virmani R. Coronary atherosclerosis in unheralded sudden coronary death under age 
50: histo-pathologic comparison with ‘healthy’ subjects dying out of hospital. Atherosclerosis. 
2001;155(2):499–508.
 37. Halon ‘DA, Sapoznikov D, Lewis BS, Gotsman MS. Localization of Lesions in the Coronary 
circulation. Am J Cardiol. 1983;52:921–6.
 38. Gotsman M, Rosenheck S, Nassar H, Welber S, Sapoznikov D, Mosseri M, Weiss A, Lotan 
C, Rozenman Y . Angiographic findings in the coronary arteries after thrombolysis in acute 
myocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol. 1992;70:715–23.
 39. Schmermund A, Möhlenkamp S, Baumgart D, Kriener P, Pump H, Grönemeyer D, Seibel 
R, Erbel R.  Usefulness of topography of coronary calcium by electron-beam computed 
tomography in predicting the natural history of coronary atherosclerosis. Am J Cardiol. 
2000;86:127–32.
 40. Schmermund A, Baumgart D, Möhlenkamp S, Kriener P, Pump H, Grönemeyer D, Seibel 
R, Erbel R.  Natural history and topographic pattern of progression of coronary calcifica-
tion in symptomatic patients: An electron-beam CT study. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 
2001;21(3):421–6.
 41. Erbel R, Mahabadi AA, Kälsch HH. The coronary calcium score for risk prediction. Cardiovasc 
Med. 2015;18(03):75–82. https://doi.org/10.4414/cvm.2015.00310.
 42. Schmermund A, Möhlenkamp S, Berenbein S, Pump H, Moebus S, Roggenbuck U, Stang 
A, Seibel R, Grönemeyer D, Jöckel KH, Erbel R. Population-based assessment of subclini-
cal coronary atherosclerosis using electron-beam computed tomography. Atherosclerosis. 
2006;185(1):177–82.
 43. Taylor AJ, Bindeman J, Feuerstein I, Cao F, Brazaitis M, O'Malley PG. Coronary calcium 
independently predicts incident premature coronary heart disease over measured cardiovascu-
lar risk factors: mean three-year outcomes in the Prospective Army Coronary Calcium (PACC) 
project. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46(5):807–14.
 44. McClelland R, Chung H, Detrano R, Post W, Kronmal RA. Distribution of coronary artery 
calcium by race, gender, and age: results from the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis 
(MESA). Circulation. 2006;113(1):30–7.
 45. Erbel R, Delaney JA, Lehmann N, McClelland RL, Möhlenkamp S, Kronmal RA, 
Schmermund A, Moebus S, Dragano N, Stang A, Jöckel KH, Budoff MJ, Multi-Ethnic 
Study of Atherosclerosis, Investigator Group of the Heinz Nixdorf Recall Study. Signs of 
subclinical coronary atherosclerosis in relation to risk factor distribution in the Multi-Ethnic 
Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) and the Heinz Nixdorf Recall Study (HNR). Eur Heart J. 
2008;29(22):2782–91. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehn439.
 46. Vliegenthart R, Oudkerk M, Hofman A, Oei HH, van Dijck W, van Rooij FJ, Witteman 
JC. Coronary calcification improves cardiovascular risk prediction in the elderly. Circulation. 
2005;112:572–7.
26 Blood Pressure and Atherosclerosis378
 47. Erbel R, Budoff M.  Improvement of cardiovascular risk prediction using coronary imag-
ing: subclinical atherosclerosis: the memory of lifetime risk factor exposure. Eur Heart J. 
2012;33(10):1201–13. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehs076.
 48. Budoff M, Yang TP, Shavelle RM, Lamont DH, Brundage BH. Ethnic differences in coronary 
atherosclerosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;39(3):408–12.
 49. Lee TC, O’Malley PG, Feuerstein I, Taylor AJ. The prevalence and severity of coronary artery 
calcification on coronary artery computed tomography in black and white subjects. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2003;41(1):39–44.
 50. Bild DE, Detrano R, Peterson D, Guerci A, Liu K, Shahar E, Ouyang P, Jackson S, Saad 
MF. Ethnic differences in coronary calcification: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis 
(MESA). Circulation. 2005;111(10):1313–20.
 51. Shaw LJ, Raggi P, Berman DS, Callister TQ. Coronary artery calcium as a measure of biologic 
age. Atherosclerosis. 2006;188:112–9.
 52. Erbel R, Lehmann N, Churzidse S, Rauwolf M, Mahabadi AA, Möhlenkamp S, Moebus S, 
Bauer M, Kälsch H, Budde T, Montag M, Schmermund A, Stang A, Führer-Sakel D, Weimar C, 
Roggenbuck U, Dragano N, Jöckel KH, Heinz Nixdorf Recall Study Investigators. Progression 
of coronary artery calcification seems to be inevitable, but predictable—results of the Heinz 
Nixdorf Recall (HNR) study. Eur Heart J. 2014;35(42):2960–71. https://doi.org/10.1093/
eurheartj/ehu288.
 53. Lehmann N, Möhlenkamp S, Mahabadi AA, Schmermund A, Roggenbuck U, Seibel R, 
Grönemeyer D, Budde T, Dragano N, Stang A, Mann K, Moebus S, Erbel R, Jöckel KH. Effect 
of smoking and other traditional risk factors on the onset of coronary artery calcification: 
results of the Heinz Nixdorf recall study. Atherosclerosis. 2014;232(2):339–45. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2013.11.045.
 54. Jöckel KH, Lehmann N, Jaeger BR, Moebus S, Möhlenkamp S, Schmermund A, Dragano N, 
Stang A, Grönemeyer D, Seibel R, Mann K, V olbracht L, Siegrist J, Erbel R. Smoking cessation 
and subclinical atherosclerosis—results from the Heinz Nixdorf Recall Study. Atherosclerosis. 
2009;203:221–7.
 55. Peinemann F, Moebus S, Dragano N, Möhlenkamp S, Lehmann N, Zeeb H, Erbel R, Jöckel 
K-H, Hoffmann B, On Behalf of the Heinz Nixdorf Recall Study Investigative Group. Second- 
hand smoke exposure and coronary artery calcification among non-smoking participants of a 
population-based cohort. Environ Health Perspect. 2011;119:1556–61.
 56. Erbel R, Lehmann N, Churzidse S, Möhlenkamp S, Moebus S, Mahabadi AA, Schmermund A, 
Stang A, Dragano N, Grönemeyer D, Seibel R, Kälsch H, Bauer M, Bröcker-Preuss M, Mann 
K, Jöckel KH, Investigators HNRS. Gender-specific association of coronary artery calcium and 
lipoprotein parameters: the Heinz Nixdorf Recall Study. Atherosclerosis. 2013;229(2):531–40. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2013.04.015.
 57. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redon J, Zanchetti A, Böhm M, Christiaens T, Cifkova R, 
De Backer G, Dominiczak A, Galderisi M, Grobbee DE, Jaarsma T, Kirchhof P, Kjeldsen SE, 
Laurent S, Manolis AJ, Nilsson PM, Ruilope LM, Schmieder RE, Sirnes PA, Sleight P, Viigimaa 
M, Waeber B, Zannad F, Redon J, Dominiczak A, Narkiewicz K, Nilsson PM, Burnier M, 
Viigimaa M, Ambrosioni E, Caufield M, Coca A, Olsen MH, Schmieder RE, Tsioufis C, van 
de Borne P, Zamorano JL, Achenbach S, Baumgartner H, Bax JJ, Bueno H, Dean V , Deaton 
C, Erol C, Fagard R, Ferrari R, Hasdai D, Hoes AW, Kirchhof P, Knuuti J, Kolh P, Lancellotti 
P, Linhart A, Nihoyannopoulos P, Piepoli MF, Ponikowski P, Sirnes PA, Tamargo JL, Tendera 
M, Torbicki A, Wijns W, Windecker S, Clement DL, Coca A, Gillebert TC, Tendera M, Rosei 
EA, Ambrosioni E, Anker SD, Bauersachs J, Hitij JB, Caulfield M, De Buyzere M, De Geest 
S, Derumeaux GA, Erdine S, Farsang C, Funck-Brentano C, Gerc V , Germano G, Gielen 
S, Haller H, Hoes AW, Jordan J, Kahan T, Komajda M, Lovic D, Mahrholdt H, Olsen MH, 
Ostergren J, Parati G, Perk J, Polonia J, Popescu BA, Reiner Z, Rydén L, Sirenko Y , Stanton 
A, Struijker-Boudier H, Tsioufis C, van de Borne P, Vlachopoulos C, V olpe M, Wood DA. 
2013 ESH/ESC guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension: the Task Force for the 
Management of Arterial Hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of 
the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2013;34(28):2159–219. https://doi.
org/10.1093/eurheartj/eht151.
R. Erbel et al.379
 58. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, Arnett DK, Blaha MJ, Cushman M, Das SR, de Ferranti 
S, Després JP, Fullerton HJ, Howard VJ, Huffman MD, Isasi CR, Jiménez MC, Judd SE, 
Kissela BM, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Liu S, Mackey RH, Magid DJ, McGuire DK, Mohler 
ER 3rd, Moy CS, Muntner P, Mussolino ME, Nasir K, Neumar RW, Nichol G, Palaniappan 
L, Pandey DK, Reeves MJ, Rodriguez CJ, Rosamond W, Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi A, 
Turan TN, Virani SS, Woo D, Yeh RW, Turner MB, American Heart Association Statistics 
Committee, Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart disease and stroke statistics-2016 update: 
a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;133(4):e38–360. https://doi.
org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000350. Erratum in: Circulation. 2016;133(15):e599.
 59. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, Jones DW, 
Materson BJ, Oparil S, Wright JT Jr, Roccella EJ, Joint National Committee on Prevention, 
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure, National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute, National High Blood Pressure Education Program Coordinating Committee. 
Seventh report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and 
Treatment of High Blood Pressure. Hypertension. 2003;42:1206–52.
 60. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, Cushman WC, Dennison-Himmelfarb C, Handler J, Lackland 
DT, LeFevre ML, MacKenzie TD, Ogedegbe O, Smith SC Jr, Svetkey LP, Taler SJ, Townsend 
RR, Wright JT Jr, Narva AS, Ortiz E. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management 
of high blood pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth 
Joint National Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014;311(5):507–20. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jama.2013.284427. Erratum in: JAMA. 2014;311(17):1809.
 61. Goff DC Jr, Lloyd-Jones DM, Bennett G, Coady S, D’Agostino RB Sr, Gibbons R, Greenland 
P, Lackland DT, Levy D, O'Donnell CJ, Robinson JG, Schwartz JS, Shero ST, Smith SC Jr, 
Sorlie P, Stone NJ, Wilson PW, American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the assessment of cardio-
vascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63(25 Pt B):2935–59. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jacc.2013.11.005. Epub 2013 Nov 12. No abstract available. Erratum in: J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2014;63(25 Pt B):3026.
 62. Ortiz E, Oparil S, James PA.  Guidelines for managing high blood pressure--reply. JAMA. 
2014;312(3):295–6. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2014.6599.
 63. Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, Bairey Merz CN, Blum CB, Eckel RH, Goldberg 
AC, Gordon D, Levy D, Lloyd-Jones DM, McBride P, Schwartz JS, Shero ST, Smith SC Jr, 
Watson K, Wilson PW, Eddleman KM, Jarrett NM, LaBresh K, Nevo L, Wnek J, Anderson JL, 
Halperin JL, Albert NM, Bozkurt B, Brindis RG, Curtis LH, DeMets D, Hochman JS, Kovacs 
RJ, Ohman EM, Pressler SJ, Sellke FW, Shen WK, Smith SC Jr, Tomaselli GF. American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. 2013 
ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of blood cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic car -
diovascular risk in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129(25 Suppl 2):S1–
45. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.0000437738.63853.7a. Erratum in: Circulation. 2015; 
132(25):e396. Circulation. 2014; 129(25 Suppl 2):S46-8.
 64. Piepoli MF, Hoes AW, Agewall S, Albus C, Brotons C, Catapano AL, Cooney MT, Corrà U, 
Cosyns B, Deaton C, Graham I, Hall MS, Hobbs FD, Løchen ML, Löllgen H, Marques-Vidal 
P, Perk J, Prescott E, Redon J, Richter DJ, Sattar N, Smulders Y , Tiberi M, van der Worp HB, 
van Dis I, Verschuren WM, Authors/Task Force Members. 2016 European Guidelines on car -
diovascular disease prevention in clinical practice: The Sixth Joint Task Force of the European 
Society of Cardiology and Other Societies on Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Clinical 
Practice (constituted by representatives of 10 societies and by invited experts). Developed 
with the special contribution of the European Association for Cardiovascular Prevention & 
Rehabilitation (EACPR). Eur Heart J. 2016;37(29):2315–81. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/
ehw106.
 65. Julius S, Jamerson K, Mejia A, Krause L, Schork N, Jones K. The association of borderline 
hypertension with target organ changes and higher coronary risk. Tecumseh blood pressure 
study. JAMA. 1990;264:354–8.
26 Blood Pressure and Atherosclerosis380
 66. Lloyd-Jones DM, Evans JC, Levy D. Hypertension in adults across the age spectrum: current 
outcomes and control in the community. JAMA. 2005;294:466–72.
 67. Miura K, Daviglus ML, Dyer AR, Liu K, Garside DB, Stamler J, Greenland P. Relationship of 
blood pressure to 25-year mortality due to coronary heart disease, cardiovascular diseases, and 
all causes in young adult men: the Chicago Heart Association Detection Project in Industry. 
Arch Intern Med. 2001;161:1501–8.
 68. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, Evans JC, O'Donnell CJ, Kannel WB, Levy D. Impact of high- 
normal blood pressure on the risk of cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1291–7.
 69. Russell LB, Valiyeva E, Carson JL.  Effects of prehypertension on admissions and deaths: 
a simulation. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164(19):2119–24. Erratum in: Arch Intern Med. 
2005;165:1720.
 70. Grotto I, Grossman E, Huerta M, Sharabi Y . Prevalence of prehypertension and associated 
cardiovascular risk profiles a young Israeli adults. Hypertension. 2006;48:254–9.
 71. Lloyd-Jones DM. Ischemic heart disease risk. Chapter B77. In: Izzo JL, Sicca DA, Black HR, 
editors. Hypertension primer. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2008. 
p. 349–53.
 72. Kannel WB, PWF W. Cardiovascular risk factors and hypertension. In: Izzo JL, Sicca DA, 
Black HR, editors. Hypertension Primer. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2008. p. 244–9.
 73. Giannotti G, Doerries C, Mocharla PS, Mueller MF, Bahlmann FH, Horvàth T, Jiang H, 
Sorrentino SA, Steenken N, Manes C, Marzilli M, Rudolph KL, Lüscher TF, Drexler H, 
Landmesser U. Impaired endothelial repair capacity of early endothelial progenitor cells in 
prehypertension: relation to endothelial dysfunction. Hypertension. 2010;55:1389–97.
 74. Ikram MK, Witteman JC, Vingerling JR, Breteler MM, Hofman A, de Jong PT. Retinal vessel 
diameters and risk of hypertension: the Rotterdam Study. Hypertension. 2006;47:189–94.
 75. Manios E, Tsivgoulis G, Koroboki E, Stamatelopoulos K, Papamichael C, Toumanidis S, 
Stamboulis E, Vemmos K, Zakopoulos N.  Impact of prehypertension on common carotid 
artery intima-media thickness and left ventricular mass. Stroke. 2009;40:1515–8.
 76. Mahoney LT, Burns TL, Stanford W, Thompson BH, Witt JD, Rost CA, Lauer RM. Coronary 
risk factors measured in childhood and young adult life are associated with coronary artery 
calcification in young adults: the Muscatine Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;27(2):277–84.
 77. Peralta CA, Adeney KL, Shlipak MG, Jacobs D Jr, Duprez D, Bluemke D, Polak J, Psaty 
B, Kestenbaum BR.  Structural and functional vascular alterations and incident hyperten-
sion in normotensive adults: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. Am J Epidemiol. 
2010;171:63–71.
 78. Julius S, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, Weber MA, Michelson EL, Kaciroti N, Black HR, Grimm RH 
Jr, Messerli FH, Oparil S, Schork MA, Trial of Preventing Hypertension (TROPHY) Study 
Investigators. Feasibility of treating prehypertension with an angiotensin-receptor blocker. N 
Engl J Med. 2006;354:1685–897.
 79. Lüders S, Schrader J, Berger J, Unger T, Zidek W, Böhm M, Middeke M, Motz W, Lübcke C, 
Gansz A, Brokamp L, Schmieder RE, Trenkwalder P, Haller H, Dominiak P, PHARAO Study 
Group. The PHARAO study: prevention of hypertension with the angiotensin- converting 
enzyme inhibitor ramipril in patients with high-normal blood pressure: a prospective, ran-
domized, controlled prevention trial of the German Hypertension League. J Hypertens. 
2008;26:1487–96.
 80. NA VIGATOR Study Group, McMurray JJ, Holman RR, Haffner SM, Bethel MA, Holzhauer 
B, Hua TA, Belenkov Y , Boolell M, Buse JB, Buckley BM, Chacra AR, Chiang FT, Charbonnel 
B, Chow CC, Davies MJ, Deedwania P, Diem P, Einhorn D, Fonseca V , Fulcher GR, Gaciong 
Z, Gaztambide S, Giles T, Horton E, Ilkova H, Jenssen T, Kahn SE, Krum H, Laakso M, 
Leiter LA, Levitt NS, Mareev V , Martinez F, Masson C, Mazzone T, Meaney E, Nesto R, 
Pan C, Prager R, Raptis SA, Rutten GE, Sandstroem H, Schaper F, Scheen A, Schmitz O, 
Sinay I, Soska V , Stender S, Tamás G, Tognoni G, Tuomilehto J, Villamil AS, V ozár J, Califf 
RM. Effect of valsartan on the incidence of diabetes and cardiovascular events. N Engl J Med. 
2010;362:1477–90.
R. Erbel et al.381
 81. Stang A, Moebus S, Möhlenkamp S, Dragano N, Schmermund A, Beck M, Siegrist J, Erbel 
R, Jöckel KH, Heinz Nixdorf Recall Study Investigative Group. Algorithms for convert-
ing random- zero to automated oscillometric blood pressure values, and vice versa. Am J 
Epidemiol. 2006;164:85–94.
 82. National Center for Health Statistics. Health, United States. With chartbook on trends in the 
health of Americans. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics; 2007.
 83. Westheim A, Klemetsrud T, Tretli S, Stokke HP, Olsen H. Blood pressure levels in treated 
hypertensive patients in general practice in Norway. Blood Press. 2001;10:37–42.
 84. Ong KL, Tso AW, Lam KS, Cheung BM. Gender difference in blood pressure control and 
cardiovascular risk factors in Americans with diagnosed hypertension. Hypertension. 
2008;51:1142–8.
 85. Halimi JM, Giraudeau B, V ol S, Cacès E, Nivet H, Tichet J. The risk of hypertension in men: 
direct and indirect effects of chronic smoking. J Hypertens. 2002;20:187–93.
 86. Detrano R, Guerci AD, Carr JJ, Bild DE, Burke G, Folsom AR, Liu K, Shea S, Szklo M, 
Bluemke DA, O'Leary DH, Tracy R, Watson K, Wong ND, Kronmal RA. Coronary calcium as 
a predictor of coronary events in four racial or ethnic groups. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:1336–45.
 87. Elias-Smale SE, Proença RV , Koller MT, Kavousi M, van Rooij FJ, Hunink MG, Steyerberg 
EW, Hofman A, Oudkerk M, Witteman JC.  Coronary calcium score improves classifica-
tion of coronary heart disease risk in the elderly: the Rotterdam study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2010;56:1407–14.
 88. Lloyd-Jones D, Adams R, Carnethon M, De Simone G, Ferguson TB, Flegal K, Ford E, Furie 
K, Go A, Greenlund K, Haase N, Hailpern S, Ho M, Howard V , Kissela B, Kittner S, Lackland 
D, Lisabeth L, Marelli A, McDermott M, Meigs J, Mozaffarian D, Nichol G, O’Donnell C, 
Roger V , Rosamond W, Sacco R, Sorlie P, Stafford R, Steinberger J, Thom T, Wasserthiel- 
Smoller S, Wong N, Wylie-Rosett J, Hong Y , American Heart Association Statistics Committee 
and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Heart disease and stroke statistics—2009 update: a report 
from the American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. 
Circulation. 2009;119:e21–181.
 89. Aronow WS, Fleg JL, Pepine CJ, Artinian NT, Bakris G, Brown AS, Ferdinand KC, Forciea 
MA, Frishman WH, Jaigobin C, Kostis JB, Mancia G, Oparil S, Ortiz E, Reisin E, Rich MW, 
Schocken DD, Weber MA, Wesley DJ. ACCF/AHA 2011 Expert Consensus Document on 
Hypertension in the Elderly: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation Task 
Force on Clinical Expert Consensus Documents. Circulation. 2011;123:2434–506.
 90. Reboldi G, Gentile G, Angeli F, Ambrosio G, Mancia G, Verdecchia P. Effects of intensive 
blood pressure reduction on myocardial infarction and stroke in diabetes: a meta-analysis in 
73,913 patients. J Hypertens. 2011;29:1253–69.
 91. Rumberger JA, Simons DB, Fitzpatrick LA, Sheedy PF, Schwartz RS. Coronary artery cal-
cium area by electron-beam computed tomography and coronary atherosclerotic plaque area. 
A histopathologic correlative study. Circulation. 1995;92:2157–62.
 92. McEvoy JW, Martin SS, Dardari ZA, Miedema MD, Sandfort V , Yeboah J, Budoff MJ, Goff DC 
Jr, Psaty BM, Post WS, Nasir K, Blumenthal RS, Blaha MJ. Coronary artery calcium to guide 
a personalized risk-based approach to initiation and intensification of antihypertensive therapy. 
Circulation. 2017;135(2):153–65. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.025471.
26 Blood Pressure and Atherosclerosis383 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_27
G. Seravalle 
Cardiology Department, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, IRCCS S. Luca Hospital, Milano, Italy 
G. Grassi 
Medical Clinic, S. Gerardo Hospital, University Milano-Bicocca, Monza-Milano, Italy 
IRCCS Multimedica, Milano, Italy 
G. Mancia ( *) 
Emeritus Professor of Medicine,  University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
e-mail: giuseppe.mancia@unimib.it27Blood Pressure Measurement, 
White-  Coat and Masked Hypertension
G. Seravalle, G. Grassi, and Giuseppe Mancia
27.1  Introduction
High blood pressure is the most common diagnosis in adult primary care practice 
and the most important cardiovascular risk factor [1].
While it is quite easy to obtain a blood pressure (BP) measurement, it appears 
difficult to estimate the correct BP level in a given circumstance [2] and this should 
be regarded as a surrogate measure for the true BP [3]. Additional modalities capa-
ble to overcome the limitations of the clinic BP measurement, the so-called office 
BP, are now available to physicians wishing to obtain the best BP profile of the 
patients: automated office BP measurement, home BP monitoring, and ambulatory 
BP monitoring (ABPM). These new modalities have also allowed to identify two 
specific phenomena linked to hypertension: the white-coat and masked hyperten-
sion. These modalities also allow to evaluate with more accuracy the efficacy of the 
antihypertensive treatment and are able to correlate with cardiovascular prognosis. 
These aspects will be considered in this chapter.384
27.2  Automated Measurement: Advantages in Office 
and Self-Measurement
The automated BP measurement modality allows multiple BP readings being taken 
with a fully automated device while the patient rests quietly and alone in a room. 
This could be particularly useful during office detection. An improved accuracy, a 
reduced digit preference, an absence of observer bias, and a strong relationship with 
target organ damage are advantage of this modality of BP measurement [4, 5]. It has 
been shown a high correlation between automated office BP measurements and 
mean awake ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) and target organ dam-
age. This suggests that a replacement of traditional office BP assessment should be 
advocated. Their use should also be suggested and improved for self-measurement 
at home.
Home BP monitoring per se shows several advantages: (a) predicts subclinical 
target organ damage and cardiovascular events similar to ABPM and better than 
office BP; (b) shows considerable agreement with ABPM in detecting white-coat 
and masked hypertension; and (c) improves long-term adherence to antihyperten-
sive drug treatment and hypertension control rates in treated hypertensive patients 
[6]. Thus home BP could have a primary role in the diagnosis and in long-term 
follow-up [7].
27.3  Ambulatory BP Monitoring
The analysis of 24 h ambulatory BP recordings can yield a rich body of information 
on different aspects that characterize subjects’ BP daily life. This includes quantifi-
cation of 24  h, daytime and nighttime average BP values, the BP fluctuations 
between day and night, the difference between clinic and 24 h or daytime average 
BP and the different components of overall 24 h BP variability. Several studies have 
shown that these parameters may allow more precise diagnostic and prognostic 
evaluations of the hypertensive state of our patients [8–10]. Several are the method-
ological advantages of this measurement: (a) 24  h average BP values are more 
reproducible than isolated office readings [10]; (b) noninvasive automatic ambula-
tory BP monitoring, although requiring repeated cuff inflations throughout the day 
and night and thus unavoidably worsening sleep quality, does not usually prevent 
the occurrence of a physiological nocturnal BP reduction [11]; (c) automatic and 
semiautomatic cuff inflations do not trigger any alerting reaction and pressure rise 
in the patients [12]; and (d) it is largely unaffected by any placebo effect. ABPM 
enables white-coat hypertension to be ruled out while it facilitates the assessment of 
BP during sleep-time allowing to find a nondipping pattern and nocturnal hyperten-
sion that are strongly associated with increased cardiovascular morbidity and mor -
tality [10].
Some disadvantages should be taken into account. First, the discontinuation 
nature of the BP readings does not prevent the reliable calculation of the 24 h aver -
age BP values and relative BP variability. Second, the accuracy of measurements in 
G. Seravalle et al.385
ambulant subjects may not be guaranteed even with validated devices. This empha-
sizes the need for adequate signal editing to remove artifacts before proceeding to 
data analysis.
27.4  Clinical Value of ABPM
The large diffusion of this technique in a clinical setting has allowed to collect data 
with an important clinical value. Several studies have shown that the organ damage 
associated with hypertension is more closely related to 24 h mean [13] and 24 h 
systolic or diastolic BP has a steeper relationship with cardiovascular morbid or 
fatal events than the corresponding office BP values (Fig.  27.1) [9, 14–17]. This is 
particularly true for left ventricular hypertrophy, alterations in left ventricular func-
tion, increased number of lacunae at the brain level, renal dysfunction, and altera-
tions in small and large arteries [9, 13, 18]. Data coming from controlled studies 
have clearly shown that regression of left ventricular hypertrophy was more closely 
predicted by treatment-induced changes in 24 h average than in clinic BP support-
ing the prognostic superiority of the former approach [19].
SBP (mmHg)11-yr risk of CV death
80100 120 140 160 180 200 220 2400102030405060
Office24 h3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
90110130150170190210230
SBP (mmHg)5-yr risk of CV deathOffice24 h
80100 120 140 160 180 200 22000.10.22-yr risk of CV eventsOffice24 h
SBP (mmHg)Syst -Eur Dublin
PAMELA
Fig. 27.1 Relationship between office blood pressure (BP) or 24  h average systolic blood pres-
sure (SBP) with cardiovascular (CV) events or mortality in the SYST-EUR study, in the Dublin 
study, and in the PAMELA study. Figure created with data derived from Refs. [15, 16, and 9], 
respectively27 Blood Pressure Measurement, White-Coat and Masked Hypertension386
Additional support to the prognostic importance of the day-night BP cycle comes 
from the evidence that absolute nighttime BP values are prognostically superior to 
the daytime ones. In the PAMELA study [9] a 10 mmHg increase of nighttime sys-
tolic BP was accompanied by a much greater increase of cardiovascular mortality 
(Fig.  27.2). This was also evident in the 8.4 years follow-up in the Dublin outcome 
study [16] showing a 21% increase in cardiovascular mortality for the increase in 
night systolic BP. The superior prognostic value of nighttime BP has been found to 
predict also the development of nephropathy [20].
The prognostic importance of the day-night BP reduction has also been docu-
mented in population-based longitudinal studies, confirming data obtained in hyper -
tensive population [15, 21]. In the Ohasama study [22] nondipping was associated 
with a 2.5 increase in cardiovascular mortality than in dippers. This was also evident 
in the 12 years follow-up of the PAMELA study [23].
In addition to day-night BP changes, 24  h BP monitoring allows to evaluate 
short-term variations that are particularly marked and frequent during the day and 
occur in a lesser degree also during the nighttime [24]. These variations largely 
depend on behavioral activities but other factors may favor or oppose BP changes 
through the mediation of the autonomic nervous system and vasoactive substances 
[25]. It has been established that BP variability increases with age and with the 
progression of the hypertensive state [24, 25]. The limitation due to the intermittent 
BP readings is improved with the development of devices that are able to measure 
beat-to-beat ambulatory BP noninvasively, thus allowing a precise quantification of 
the overall magnitude of the BP variations and an analysis of its patterns.
27.5  White-Coat and Masked Hypertension
The use of ABPM and home BP measurements has allowed to disclose two condi-
tions unknown during office evaluation: white-coat (WC) and masked hypertension 
[10, 26]. In WCH, out-of-office BP is normal, and BP values in the doctor’s office 
are persistently elevated, whereas in masked is the opposite, that is, out-of-office BP 
is high, where as office BP is normal (Fig.  27.3). The original definition of WCH is 1.12.6
1.74.3
2.87.1
012345678
Day time  
Nigh ttime  
120-130 130-140 140-150Increase in risk of CV death (%)
Baseline SBP (mmHg)Fig. 27.2 Increase in the 
risk of cardiovascular (CV) 
death for a 10 mmHg 
increase in systolic blood 
pressure (SBP) at different 
initial SBP values. Data 
from the 148-month 
follow-up in the PAMELA 
study. Figure created with 
data derived from Ref. [9]
G. Seravalle et al.387
based on the belief that this condition is caused by the alerting reaction and transient 
BP rise that accompany the doctor’s visit but because other factors are involved in 
frequently the term isolated office hypertension is used [27, 28]. These definitions 
refer to untreated subjects because in treated patients the BP discrepancy may be 
caused by specific characteristics of the drugs and patients may have had originally 
a sustained BP elevation.
27.5.1  White-Coat Hypertension
Although WCH is a consequence of the white-coat effect (WCE), the presence of a sig-
nificant WCE in a given subject may not necessarily be accompanied by WCH, unless 
the rise in BP levels during the medical visit is high enough to reach the hypertensive 
range. In the PIUMA (Progetto Ipertensione Umbria Monitoraggio Ambulatoriale) 
study [21], conducted in more the 1300 hypertensive subjects, it has been shown that 
the severity of hypertension was inversely correlated with the prevalence of WCH but 
directly correlated with the magnitude of WCE. A critical condition for the diagnosis 
of WCH or isolated office hypertension is the occurrence of a persistent BP elevation 
at the time of consultation and of normal out-of-office BP levels over time. Thus iso-
lated elevations in office BP values recorded at the beginning of the first visits and that 
later disappear should be regarded as a temporary BP increase and should not lead to 
the diagnosis of WCH. In some subjects these transient and non-sustained increases 
in BP levels may be the result of an increased BP variability.Sustaine d
normotension
or controlled HT*Masked HT or
maske d
uncontrolled HT*White coat HT
(isolated office HT)
or office resistant HT*Sustained HT
or uncontrolled HT*Norma l
(<135/85 mmHg)Elevated
(≥135 and/or 85 mmHg )Normal
(<135/85 mmHg)Elevate d
(≥135 and/or 85 mmHg )Home or day time
ambulatory BP Home or day time
ambulatory BPElevated
(≥140 and/or 90 mmHg )Normal 
(<140/90 mmHg)Office blood pressure levels
Fig. 27.3 Schematic relationship between office and home or daytime ambulatory blood pressure 
in treated hypertensive subjects (asterisk). BP Blood pressure, HT Hypertension27 Blood Pressure Measurement, White-Coat and Masked Hypertension388
Also the criteria considered for defining normalcy of BP levels during day-
time may lead to over- or underestimation of the frequency of WCH. After the 
evidence provided by the PAMELA study [29] and other population studies [30, 
31] and meta-analyses [32] supporting a threshold value of <130–135/85 mmHg 
as the upper limit of daytime ambulatory BP normality, the frequency of this 
phenomenon was reported to range from 9% to 16% in the general population 
and from 25% to 46% among hypertensive subjects [16, 33, 34]. While the con-
ventional cutoff value for hypertension is an office values of ≥ 140/90 mmHg, 
most studies in WCH have used a cutoff value of ≥ 135/85 mm Hg for out-of-
office daytime or home BP and ≥ 130/80 mmHg for 24 h BP. Due to the impor -
tance of nighttime BP levels in predicting cardiovascular outcome and the 
presence of high BP levels during the night in some subjects with WCH, the new 
guidelines [10, 26] have expanded the definition of WCH requiring normality not 
only in awake BP values but also in 24  h (<130/80  mmHg) and sleep 
(<120/70 mmHg) BP levels.
Several studies have investigated the clinical importance of WCH. These evi-
dences have shown that WCH is frequently associated with cardiac hypertrophy, 
increased in intima-media thickness or renal damage [35–37]. This was not the case 
in other studies in which end-organ damage was reported to be similar in WCH and 
in normotensive subjects [38]. Also longitudinal studies and a recent meta-analysis 
have reported similar incidence of cardiac and cerebrovascular risk [34, 39, 40]. The 
observation that the incidence of cerebrovascular events in these patients may begin 
to rise with a delay greater than 6–8 years indicates however that WCH is not clini-
cally benign. The ten-year follow-up in the Danish study has shown a significant 
(p < 0.02) increase of cardiovascular risk (+25%) [41].
A greater prevalence of metabolic risk factors has been shown in WCH in longer 
follow-up observation period and this could be associated with the 1.5–2-fold higher 
risk of developing new-onset diabetes or sustained hypertension [16, 42]. A higher 
24 h blood pressure variability with independent and adverse prognostic effects has 
been observed in WCH than in normotensives and this may contribute to the 
increased cardiovascular risk of these patients [23].
27.5.2  Masked Hypertension
The prevalence of masked hypertension (normal office BP and elevated ambulatory 
or home BP values) is thought to be 10–15% of the general population [26]. These 
subjects should have undergone further examinations because data have clearly sug-
gested that in this condition (a) there is a greater prevalence and severity of meta-
bolic risk factors; (b) common is the relief of subclinical cardiac, vascular, or renal 
damage; (c) the long-term risk of developing sustained hypertension, diabetes, or 
left ventricular hypertrophy is 2–3 times greater than that of individuals with normal 
in- and out-of-office BP; and (d) there is a greater incidence of cardiovascular mor -
bid and fatal events with an overall risk quite closer to established hypertensive 
subjects [26, 42–46].
G. Seravalle et al.389
27.6  Pathogenetic Mechanisms
As regard the mechanisms, evidences have shown [47– 49] that white-coat hyper -
tension is characterized by a marked adrenergic overdrive that appears to be wide-
spread to the whole circulation. It has been shown that muscle sympathetic nerve 
traffic is about 30% greater in white-coat as compared to age-matched normoten-
sives and that the magnitude of the adrenergic overdrive is almost superimposable 
to the one characterizing essential hypertension. Direct recordings of sympathetic 
nerve traffic have shown that the pronounced activation of skin nerves and the con-
comitant sympathetic inhibition of muscle sympathetic nerve traffic may be similar 
to a “defense reaction” that has been described in animals. This reaction depends 
on the activation of superior areas integrating emotional factors [50]. It has been 
shown that patients with WCH display a higher state of anxiety. Application of 
laboratory stressors has allowed to show that patients with WCH are not necessar -
ily hyperreactive to all types of emotional stimuli [29]. Microneurographic studies 
by our group have shown that this adrenergic overactivity observed in essential 
hypertension and WCH is also associated with an impairment in the baroreflex 
control of heart rate, but not of sympathetic neural drive [48, 49]. Patients with 
WCH also display higher circulating levels of asymmetric dimethylarginine, thus 
suggesting a possible presence of endothelial dysfunction, although not specific for 
this hypertensive state [51, 52].
Similarly to WCH, masked hypertension is characterized by a hyperadrenergic 
tone, similar to that observed in WCH and essential hypertension, and by an impair -
ment of baroreflex-mediated cardiovascular control [48]. Some pathophysiological 
factors have been hypothesized for development of this condition, i.e., increased 
reactivity to stressor stimuli, smoking, excessive alcohol intake, and endothelial 
dysfunction; nevertheless the mechanisms responsible for the increase in BP load 
during ambulatory blood pressure monitoring or at home while office BP remains 
normal are still unknown [53, 54].
27.7  Prognostic Evidences
The different results of studies on the prognostic value of WCH justify the hypoth-
esis that this condition may have a high prognostic heterogeneity due to its coexis-
tence with metabolic risk factors, subclinical organ damage, and other factors 
involved in cardiovascular risk. Thus the relationship with an increased incidence of 
morbid and fatal cerebrovascular and cardiac events may be similar both to normo-
tension and hypertension. Analysis of the PAMELA data has detected two possibili-
ties to differentiate the cardiovascular risk level within the WCH category. One, 
because in all individuals of this study measurements included both ambulatory and 
home blood pressure, WC hypertensives were subdivided into those in whom both 
out-of-office BP values were normal and those in whom one BP was normal while 
the other was elevated [55]. As shown in Fig.  27.4 the incidence of cardiovascular 
events was markedly greater in the latter group. The information obtained is 27 Blood Pressure Measurement, White-Coat and Masked Hypertension390
therefore redundant. The combined use of these two approaches may serve to iden-
tify WC hypertensives in whom a substantial increase of cardiovascular risk may 
justify not only a close follow-up but perhaps also the initiation of antihypertensive 
treatment. The second possibility is related to the repetition of office blood pressure 
measurements. WC hypertensive subjects were subdivided into four groups accord-
ing to whether this condition was found twice or only in one of the office visits. 
Subjects with stable WCH had an incidence of cardiovascular morbidity and mor -
tality that was greater than that of individuals in whom the office BP elevation was 
seen one time only.
27.8  Management
Subjects with diagnosis of WCH and masked hypertension need a diagnostic and 
therapeutic workup to investigate the existence of metabolic risk factors and the 
presence of target organ damage. They also need frequent follow-up visits and peri-
odical reassessment of risk factors.
While change in lifestyle should be recommended to reduce metabolic abnormali-
ties and the risk of developing diabetes and hypertension, debated is the need of anti-
hypertensive treatment. This issue has never been addressed in specifically designed 
trials, and large-scale trials on the protective effects of antihypertensive drug treatment 
have never made use of ambulatory or home-blood pressure measurements except in 
small subgroups of patients [56]. Because an incorrect diagnosis and treatment of 
masked hypertension may lead to a worse cardiovascular prognosis, it is fundamental 
to identify those subjects at higher risk in order to make ambulatory blood pressure 01020304050
%
NT
(n = 533)True
WCH
(n = 107)Partial
WCH
(n = 1 10)9.935.545.5
No adjustmen t
NT
True WC H
Partial WC H
Adjustment for age/gender/BM I
NT
True WC H
Partial WC HRR (95%  CI)
3.57 (2.49 -5.12 )
4.57 (3.29 -6.34 )
2.89 (1.95 -4.32 )
2.58 (1.77 -3.77 )P value
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
<0.0001
0.5 12 10RR
Fig. 27.4 (a) Cumulative incidence and (b) hazard ratio (HR) for cardiovascular (CV) and all-
cause mortality in normotensives (NT), white-coat hypertensives (WCH), and true hypertensives 
(HT) of PAMELA study over a long follow-up. NT and true HT were defined by office, home, and 
ambulatory blood pressure normality and elevation, respectively. WCH was defined as true or 
partial according to whether respectively (1) both ambulatory and home blood pressure were nor -
mal and (2) or only one of these pressures was normal. Data were adjusted for age, sex, smoking, 
blood glucose, serum total cholesterol, body mass index, antihypertensive treatment, and history of 
cardiovascular events. From Ref. [55], with permission
G. Seravalle et al.391
monitoring only for those with particular evolution toward diabetes and hypertension 
or with BP alterations during bedtime due to the fact that even small reductions in 
out-of-office blood pressure might induce cardiovascular protection.
 Conclusions
An improvement on the methods for measuring BP in the doctor’s office is 
needed and should be accompanied with a maintenance of standardized rules. A 
proper diagnostic approach to the subject who presents with elevated BP levels 
in the medical office should include implementation of out-of-office BP monitor -
ing for defining whether elevation in BP levels is true or just the result of the 
white-coat effect. Although ambulatory blood pressure monitoring is considered 
the reference standard to characterize different subtypes of hypertension, home 
BP measurements have proved to be similarly effective to discriminate true to 
false hypertensive or normotensive. The diagnostic approach should be accom-
panied by the evaluation of metabolic alterations and presence of target organ 
damage and other factors capable to influence the short- and long-term variabil-
ity of BP values. While confirmation of WCH would avoid starting antihyperten-
sive treatment in subjects who have otherwise normal out-of-office BP levels, 
identifying persistent WCH in treated subjects may prevent performing unneces-
sary and costly additional diagnostic tests, also preventing increasing doses or 
number of medications. Because of the higher cardiovascular risk of WC and 
masked hypertensive patients, these deserve a more thorough evaluation and 
follow-up than normotensive ones.
References
 1. Lim SS, V os T, Flaxman AD, et al. A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and 
injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a sys-
tematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 2013;380:2224–60.
 2. Turner JR, Viera AJ, Shimbo D. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in clinical practice: a 
review. Am J Med. 2015;128:14–20.
 3. Pickering T, Shimbo D, Haas D.  Ambulatory blood-pressure monitoring. N Engl J Med. 
2006;354:2368–74.
 4. Myers MG. Replacing manual sphygmomanometers with automated blood pressure measure-
ment in routine clinical practice. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2014;41:46–53.
 5. Andreadis EA, Angelopoulos ET, Agaliotis GD, et al. Why use automated office blood pressure 
measurements in clinical practice? High Blood Press Cardiovasc Prev. 2011;18:89–91.
 6. Imai Y . Clinical significance of home blood pressure and its possible practical application. Clin 
Exp Nephrol. 2014;18:24–40.
 7. Stergiou GS, Kollias A, Zeniodi M, et al. Home blood pressure monitoring: primary role in 
hypertension management. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2014;16:462.
 8. Parati G, Mutti E, Ravogli A, et al. Advantages and disadvantages of non-invasive ambulatory 
blood pressure monitoring. J Hypertens. 1990;8(suppl 6):S33–8.
 9. Sega R, Facchetti R, Bombelli M, et  al. Prognostic value of ambulatory and home blood 
pressures compared with office blood pressure in the general population: follow-up results 
from the Pressioni Arteriose Monitorate e Loro Associazioni (PAMELA) study. Circulation. 
2005;111:1777–83.27 Blood Pressure Measurement, White-Coat and Masked Hypertension392
 10. O’Brien E, Parati G, Stergiou G, et al. European Society of Hypertension position paper on 
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring. J Hypertens. 2013;31:1731–68.
 11. Villani A, Parati G, Groppelli A, et al. Noninvasive automatic blood pressure monitoring does 
not attenuate night-time hypotension. Am J Hypertens. 1992;5:744–7.
 12. Parati G, Pomidossi G, Casadei R, Mancia G. Lack of alerting reactions to intermittent cuff 
inflations during non-invasive blood pressure monitoring. Hypertension. 1985;7:597–601.
 13. Mancia G, Parati G. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring and organ damage. Hypertension. 
2000;36:894–900.
 14. Redon J, Campos C, Narciso ML, Rodicio JL, Pascual JM, Ruilope LM. Prognostic value 
of ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in refractory hypertension: a prospective study. 
Hypertension. 1998;31:712–8.
 15. Staessen JA, Thijs L, Fagard R, O’Brien ET, Tuomilehto J, Webster J. Predicting cardiovascu-
lar risk using conventional vs ambulatory blood pressure in older patients with systolic hyper -
tension. Systolic Hypertension in Europe Trial Investigators. JAMA. 1999;282:539–46.
 16. Dolan E, Stanton A, Thijs L, et al. Superiority of ambulatory over clinic blood pressure mea-
surement in predicting mortality: the Dublin outcome study. Hypertension. 2005;46:156–61.
 17. Kikuya M, Hansen TW, Thijs L, et al. International Database on ambulatory blood pressure 
monitoring in relation to Cardiovascular Outcomes Investigators. Diagnostic thresholds for 
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring based on 10  year cardiovascular risk. Circulation. 
2007;115:2145–52.
 18. Zanchetti A, Bond MG, Heening M, et al. On behalf of the ELSA Study group. Risk factors 
associated with alterations in carotid intima-media thickness in hypertension: baseline data 
from the European Lacidipine Study on Atherosclerosis. J Hypertens. 1998;16:949–61.
 19. Mancia G, Zanchetti A, Agabiti-Rosei et al. for the SAMPLE study group. Ambulatory blood 
pressure is superiori to clinic blood pressure in predicting treatment-induced regression of left 
ventricular hypertrophy. Circulation. 1997;95:1464–70.
 20. Lurbe E, Redon J, Kesani A, et al. Increase in nocturnal blood pressure and progression to 
microalbuminuria in type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:797–805.
 21. Verdecchia P, Porcellati C, Schillaci G, et  al. Ambulatory blood pressure. An independent 
predictor of prognosis in essential hypertension. Hypertension. 1994;24:793–801.
 22. Ohkubo T, Imai Y , Tsuji I, et al. Relation between nocturnal decline in blood pressure and 
mortality. The Ohasama Study. Am J Hypertens. 1997;10:1201–7.
 23. Mancia G, Bombelli M, Facchetti R, et  al. Long-term prognostic value of blood pressure 
variability in the general population: results of the Pressioni Arteriose Monitorate e Loro 
Associazioni Study. Hypertension. 2007;49:1265–70.
 24. Mancia G, Parati G, Di Rienzo M, Zanchetti A. Blood pressure variability. In: Zanchetti A, 
Mancia G, editors. Handbook of hypertension, vol 17: pathophysiology of hypertension. 
Elsevier, Amsterdam: The Netherlands; 1997. p. 117–69.
 25. Mancia G. Short- and long-term blood pressure variability: present and future. Hypertension. 
2012;60:512–7.
 26. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, et al. Task Force Members. 2013 ESH/ESC Guidelines 
for the management of arterial hypertension: the task force for the management of arterial 
hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of 
Cardiology (ESC). J Hypertens. 2013;31:1281–357.
 27. Mancia G, Bertinieri G, Grassi G, et al. Effects of blood pressure measurement by the doctor 
on patient’s blood pressure and heart rate. Lancet. 1983;2:695–8.
 28. Parati G, Bilo G, Mancia G.  White coat effect and white coat hypertension: what do they 
mean? Cardiovasc Rev Rep. 2003;24:477–84.
 29. Mancia G, Sega R, Bravi C, et  al. Ambulatory blood pressure normality: results from the 
PAMELA study. J Hypertens. 1995;13:1377–90.
 30. Staessen JA, Bieniaszewski L, O’Brien ET, Imai Y , Fagard R. An epidemiological approach 
to ambulatory blood pressure monitoring: the Belgian Population Study. Blood Press Monit. 
1996;1:13–26.
G. Seravalle et al.393
 31. Imai Y , Nagai K, Sakuma H, et  al. Ambulatory blood pressure of adults in Ohasama. Jpn 
Hyperten. 1993;22:900–12.
 32. Staessen JA, Fagard RH, Lijnen PJ, Thijs L, Van Hoof R, Amery AK. Mean and range of 
the ambulatory pressure in normotensive subjects from a meta-analysis of 23 studies. Am J 
Cardiol. 1991;67:723–7.
 33. Pickering TG, Hall JE, Appel LJ, et al. Recommendations for blood pressure measurement in 
humans and experimental animals. Part 1: blood pressure measurement in humans: a statement 
for professionals from the subcommittee of professionall and public education of the American 
Heart Association Council on High Blood Pressure Research. Hypertension. 2005;45:142–61.
 34. Fagard RH, Cornelissen V A. Incidence of cardiovascular events in white-coat, masked and sus-
tained hypertension versus true normotension: a meta-analysis. J Hypertens. 2007;25:2193–8.
 35. Pall D, Juhasz M, Lengyel S, et al. Assessment of target-organ damage in adolescent white- 
coat and sustained hypertensives. J Hypertens. 2010;28:2139–44.
 36. Palatini P, Mormino P, Santonastaso M, et al. Target organ damage in stage I hypertensive 
subjects with white coat and sustained hypertension. Results from the HARVEST study. 
Hypertension. 1998;32:377–8.
 37. Nakashima T, Yamano S, Sasaki R, et al. White-coat hypertension contributes to the presence 
of carotid atherosclerosis. Hypertens Res. 2004;27:739–45.
 38. Kostis V , Stabouli S. Toumanidis, et al Target organ damage in white-coat and masked hyper -
tension. Am J Hypertens. 2008;21:393–9.
 39. Verdecchia P, Reboldi GP, Angeli F, et al. Short- and long-term incidence of stroke in white- 
coat hypertension. Hypertension. 2005;45:203–8.
 40. Kario K, Shimada K, Schwartz JE, et al. Silent and clinically overt stroke in older Japanese 
subjects with white-coat and sustained hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;38:238–45.
 41. Gustavsen PH, Hoegholm A, Bang LE, Kristensen KS. White coat hypertension is a cardiovas-
cular risk factor: a 10 year follow-up study. J Hum Hypertens. 2003;17:811–7.
 42. Mancia G, Bombelli M, Facchetti R, et al. Long-term risk of sustained hypertension in white 
coat or masked hypertension. Hypertension. 2009;54:226–32.
 43. Bobrie G, Chatellier G, Genes N, et  al. Cardiovascular prognosis of masked hypertension 
detected by blood pressure self-measurement in elderly treated hypertensive patients. JAMA. 
2004;291:1342–9.
 44. Angeli F, Reboldi G, Verdecchia P. Masked hypertension: evaluation, prognosis, and treat-
ment. Am J Hypertens. 2010;23:941–8.
 45. Pierdomenico SD, Cuccurullo F. Prognostic values of white coat and masked hypertension 
diagnosed by ambulatory monitoring in initially untreated subjects: an updated meta-analysis. 
Am J Hypertens. 2011;24:52–8.
 46. Ohkubo T, Kikuya M, Metoki H, et  al. Prognosis of masked hypertension and white coat 
hypertension detected by 24-h ambulatory blood pressure monitoring 10 year follow-up from 
the Ohasama study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:508–15.
 47. Smith PA, Graham LN, Mackintosh AF, et al. Sympathetic neural mechanisms in white coat 
hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40:126–32.
 48. Grassi G, Seravalle G, Quarti Trevano F, et al. Neurogenic abnormalities in masked hyperten-
sion. Hypertension. 2007;50:537–42.
 49. Grassi G, Seravalle G, Buzzi S, et al. Muscle and skin sympathetic nerve traffic during physi-
cian and nurse blood pressure measurement. J Hypertens. 2013;31:1131–5.
 50. Ogedegbe G, Pickering TG, Clemow L, et al. The misdiagnosis of hypertension: the role of 
patient anxiety. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168:2459–65.
 51. Curgunlu A, Uzun H, Bavunoglu I, et al. Increased circulating concentrations of asymmetric 
dimethylarginine (ADMA) in white coat hypertension. J Hum Hypertens. 2005;19:629–33.
 52. Grassi G. Assessment of sympathetic cardiovascular drive in human hypertension: achieve-
ments and perspectives. Hypertension. 2009;54:690–7.
 53. Schnall PI, Schwartz JE, Landsbergis PA, Warren K, Pickering TG.  Relation between job 
strain, alcohol, and ambulatory blood pressure. Hypertension. 1992;19:488–94.27 Blood Pressure Measurement, White-Coat and Masked Hypertension394
 54. Mann SJ, James GD, Wang RS, Pickering TG. Elevation of ambulatory systolic blood pressure 
in hypertesnive smokers. A case-control study. JAMA. 1991;265:2226–8.
 55. Mancia G, Bombelli M, Brambilla G, et al. Long-term prognostic value of white coat hyper -
tension: an insight from diagnostic use of both ambulatory and home blood pressure measure-
ments. Hypertension. 2013;62:168–74.
 56. Law MR, Morris JK, Wald NJ. Use of blood pressure lowering drugs in the prevention of 
cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of 147 randomised trials in the context of expectations 
from prospective epidemiological studies. BMJ. 2009;338:b1665.
G. Seravalle et al.395 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_28
G. Parati ( *) 
Istituto Auxologico Italiano, IRCCS, Department of Cardiovascular, Neural and Metabolic 
Sciences, San Luca Hospital, Milan, Italy 
Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy
e-mail: gianfranco.parati@unimib.it 
J. E. Ochoa 
Istituto Auxologico Italiano, IRCCS, Department of Cardiovascular, Neural and Metabolic 
Sciences, San Luca Hospital, Milan, Italy28Blood Pressure Variability
Gianfranco Parati and Juan Eugenio Ochoa
28.1  Introduction
Blood pressure (BP) values change significantly over time in response to environ-
mental, behavioral, and emotional stimuli. These variations represent a complex 
phenomenon, and their assessment is possible by means of different BP measure-
ment methodologies over different time windows: from beat to beat [very short-
term BP variability (BPV)], within 24 h (from minute to minute, hour to hour and 
from day to night; short-term BPV), over different days (midterm day-by-day 
BPV), or between clinic visits performed over weeks, months, seasons, and years 
(long-term BPV) [1]. While in physiological conditions these variations represent 
an adaptive response to environmental stimulations from daily life, they may also 
reflect, however, alterations in cardiovascular regulatory mechanisms or underlying 
pathological conditions. The clinical significance of BPV has been supported by a 
large body of evidence showing that the BP-related cardiovascular risk may depend 
not only on average BP levels but also on the degree of BPV . Either in the short-term 
(24 h), in the midterm (day-by-day), or in the long term (visit-to-visit), increasing 
values of BPV have been shown to be associated with development, progression, 
and severity of cardiac, vascular, and renal organ damage and with an increased risk 
of cardiovascular events and cardiovascular and all-cause mortality (Fig.  28.1). The 
evidence is limited, however, regarding the question on whether an enhanced BP 396
variability (considered as an early marker of autonomic dysregulation) may repre-
sent also a marker of future hypertension during the prehypertensive (or high nor -
mal BP) state. Aim of this chapter is to review the current evidence in the field of 
BPV regarding its mechanisms, the methodological aspects that should be consid-
ered for its assessment, its relevance and significance for cardiovascular prognosis 
as well as its potential for application in clinical practice. In its last part a brief men-
tion is made on the possible role of BPV as a predictor of future hypertension, as 
well as on the possibility that the assessment of BPV might contribute to improve 
the management of subjects with high normal office BP elevation, also defined as 
prehypertension.
28.2  Very Short-Term and Short-Term BPV
28.2.1  Mechanisms
In physiological conditions, BP fluctuations occurring beat-by-beat and within the 
24 h may represent an adaptive response of neural [2 –4], humoral, vascular [5 –8], and 
rheological mechanisms to environmental, behavioral, and emotional stimuli of daily 
life. However, when increases in short-term BPV are sustained, they may also reflect 
alterations in regulatory mechanisms (i.e., enhanced sympathetic drive and impaired 
baroreflex function) in the context of pathological conditions or neurological disor -
ders associated with autonomic dysfunction. Among short-term BP variations, altera-
tions in slower changes occurring from day to night (i.e., non-dipping or rising pattern ↑Central Sympathetic dr ive
↓Arterial/ cardiopulmonar y refle x
Humoral, rheological, en vironmental,
beha vioral and emotional f actors
Activity/ Sleep,  Age
Ventilation
↑ Very short-term BPV
(beat to beat)↑ Shor t-term BPV
(over 24 h)↑ Midterm BPV
(day-to-day )↑ Long-term BPV
(visit-to-visit <5ye ars)*↑ Very long-T erm BPV
(visit-to-visit≥5y ears)*Seasonal
changeAgingImproper dosing or
titration of AHT
↓ Arterial compliance
Age↓ Adherence and
compliance to AHT
BP measurement errors
Age
Fig. 28.1 Different types of blood pressure (BP) variability (BPV), their determinants, and prog-
nostic relevance. Taken from [1] by permission. †Cardiac, vascular, and renal SOD; ‡BPV on a 
beat-by-beat basis has not been routinely measured in population studies. Modified from Parati 
et al. with permission. AHT Antihypertensive treatment, CV Cardiovascular, eGFR Estimated glo-
merular filtration rate, ESRD End-stage renal disease, IHD Ischemic heart disease, MA 
Microalbuminuria, MI Myocardial infarction, and SOD Subclinical organ damage
G. Parati and J. E. Ochoa397
of BP at night) have shown to be importantly influenced by subject’s behavioral fac-
tors such as daytime levels of activity, changes in the sleep/wakefulness cycle, altera-
tions in autonomic cardiovascular modulation, increased sympathetic activity during 
nighttime [4 , 9], increased salt sensitivity and reduced sodium excretion [10, 11], 
sleep-related breathing disorders, obesity, insulin resistance [12], endothelial dysfunc-
tion [13], or specific drugs intake [14, 15]. A list of intrinsic cardiovascular mecha-
nisms and extrinsic factors responsible for BP fluctuations occurring in the very short 
term and in the short term are summarized in Table 28.1.
28.2.2  Methods for Assessment of Different Types  
of Blood Pressure Variability
An accurate assessment of fast BP fluctuations occurring in the very short term 
requires implementation of continuous beat-to-beat BP recordings over variable 
recording periods (i.e., 1 min to 24 h). These recordings not only allow estimation of 
the standard deviation (SD) of average BP levels (a traditional index of BPV), but also 
of very low-, low-, and high-frequency components of BP spectra contributing to 
overall BPV , thus allowing an indirect evaluation of autonomic cardiovascular modu-
lation [16]. However, the difficulties in implementing continuous invasive recordings 
outside the laboratory setting in a daily life situation on one side and the instability of 
measurements, the cost, and technical difficulties in performing noninvasive beat-by-
beat recordings on the other side have prevented the assessment of beat-by-beat BPV Table 28.1 Intrinsic cardiovascular mechanisms and extrinsic factors responsible for BP fluctua-
tions occurring in the very short term and in the short term
Intrinsic cardiovascular regulatory mechanisms
• Neural: Central sympathetic drive; Arterial and cardiopulmonary reflexes
• Rheological: Blood viscosity
•  Humoral: Catecholamines; Insulin; insulin resistance; angiotensin II; Bradykinin; 
Endothelin-1; Nitric oxide; endothelial dysfunction
• Vascular: viscoelastic properties of large arteries
• Renal: salt sensitivity and sodium excretion
• Genetic susceptibility: peripheral vasomotor modulation
Extrinsic factors
• Emotional: psychosocial stressors
• Environmental: seasonal and altitude-related changes
•  Behavioral: job strain, levels of physical activity, sleep/wakefulness cycles, quality and 
duration of sleep, postural changes, patterns of sodium intake
Pathological conditions
• Sleep-related breathing disorders (i.e., OSAS)
• Carotid artery disease
• Arterial hypertension
• Chronic kidney disease
• Heart failure
• Diabetes mellitus
• Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome
• Parkinson’s disease28 Blood Pressure Variability398
from being widely used in clinical practice. Although continuous beat-to-beat BP 
recordings would represent the optimal solution also for assessment of short-term 
BPV , its assessment is also possible through noninvasive, intermittent 24 h ABPM, at 
intervals between measurements from 15 to 30 min [17, 18]. This allows the straight-
forward estimation of short-term BPV for the whole 24 h period and separately for the 
daytime and nighttime subperiods. Table  28.2 summarizes some important aspects 
regarding the assessment of very short-term and short-term BPV .
Table 28.2 Different components of BPV and methods for their measurement
CharacteristicVery short-term 
BPV
(beat-by-beat)Short-term BPV
(within 24 h)Midterm BPV
(day-by-day)Long-term BPV
(visit-to-visit)
Method for BP 
measurementContinuous BP 
recordings in a 
laboratory setting 
or under 
ambulatory 
conditionsABPM HBPM
ABPM over 
≥48 hOBP
HBPM
ABPM
Measurement 
intervalsBeat-to-beat 15–20 min intervals 
for day and night, 
respectively. A 
15-min interval for 
the whole 24 h time 
desirable but not 
always feasibleDay-by-day Spaced by visits 
over weeks, 
months, and 
years.
For treatment 
changes, allow a 
3-month window 
before estimating 
BPV
Number of 
measurementsVariable 
depending on 
patients’ heart rate 
and recording 
durationIdeally 87–96, at 
least 72 valid 
measurements 
when focusing on 
BPVDuplicate BP 
measurements 
in the morning 
and in the 
evening (1 min 
apart) for each 
day over 7 daysAt least 2–3 BP 
measurements 
during a visit 
(1 min apart) 
when using OBP
Duplicate BP 
measurements in 
the morning and 
in the evening 
(1 min apart) for 
each day over 
7 days before 
each clinic visit 
when using 
HBPM.
At least 48 valid 
measurements for 
ABPM
Time of 
measurement 
in treated 
patientsNA NA Morning BP 
measurements 
before drug 
intakeBefore drug 
intake (or maybe 
drug intake 
within 24 h 
before office 
visit?)
G. Parati and J. E. Ochoa399
Table 28.2 (continued)
CharacteristicVery short-term 
BPV
(beat-by-beat)Short-term BPV
(within 24 h)Midterm BPV
(day-by-day)Long-term BPV
(visit-to-visit)
Duration of the 
recording 
periodVariable recording 
periods (1 min to 
24 h)24–48 h Several days, 
preferably 7 (at 
least 3 days), 
over weeks or 
monthsMonths to years
Time of 
measurementVariable 24 h/daytime/
nighttimeMorning and 
eveningTime of visit 
when using OBP 
to be 
standardized 
within a study
Morning and 
evening when 
using HBPM
Main Indices 
of BPVSD, CV , A VR
Indices of BPV in 
the frequency 
domain can be 
estimated also 
through spectral 
analysis (that is, 
very low-, low-, 
and high- 
frequency 
components). 
Indices of 
nonlinear BP 
changesSD, CV , ARV , VIM 
of 24 h, daytime 
and nighttime BP; 
time rate of BP 
changes;
24 h weighted SD
Indices of slower 
BP fluctuations 
(nighttime BP 
dipping, morning 
surge); Slower BP 
fluctuations and 
residual 
components 
through spectral 
analysisSD, CV , ARV , 
VIM, morning–
evening 
changes, 
maximum 
valuesSD, CV , ARV , 
VIM
Stable 
treatmentNA Yes Yes Not always
Advantages Beat-to-beat 
recordings allow 
assessment of 
indices of 
autonomic 
cardiovascular 
modulation.Extensive 
information on 24 h 
BP profile 
(nighttime BP 
dipping, morning 
surge).
Assessment of 
efficacy of 
antihypertensive 
drug treatment over 
24 h.Appropriate for 
both midterm 
and long-term 
monitoring 
devoid of the 
white-coat 
effect.Assessment of 
consistency of BP 
control by 
treatment over 
time.
Detection of 
seasonal BP 
changes.
(continued)28 Blood Pressure Variability400
28.2.3  Indices for Estimation of Very Short-Term BPV and Short- 
Term BPV
In general, indices for assessment of BPV over 24 h can be classified into two main 
groups: (a) indices of overall variability, focusing on faster BP variations occur -
ring reading-to-reading over the 24 h period which assess either the frequency com-
ponents of BP spectra in the frequency domain, or, in the time domain, the degree 
of dispersion, the sequence, or the instability of BP values over a certain period of 
time; and (b) indices for estimation of specific BPV patterns, focusing on slower 
BP variations within 24 h associated with circadian BP changes (i.e., day/night BP 
profiles) or with other behavioral factors ( i.e., “siesta,” awakening in the morning) 
(see Table 28.3).
Assessment of very short-term BPV is only possible from continuous beat-to-  
beat BP recordings [16]. In addition to calculation of Standard Deviation (SD) 
and other traditional indices of BPV , continuous BP recordings allow estimation 
of indices of autonomic cardiovascular modulation by applying power spectral 
analysis. It decomposes the overall BP Variance or Power into its different com-
ponents oscillating at different frequencies. The corresponding spectral indices 
are usually obtained by integrating the BP power spectrum over different fre-
quency bands by focusing on those reported to have a pathophysiological or clini-
cal relevance. This is usually done by computing BP spectral powers over a 
high-frequency band (HF power, between 0.15 and 0.50  Hz), a low-frequency 
band (LF power, between 0.15 and 0.07 Hz, centered around 0.1 Hz), and a very 
low-frequency band (VLF power, <0.07 Hz). These indices yield information on 
the autonomic control of circulation, on the baroreflex function, and the influence 
exerted by respiratory activity.
Short-term BPV may be estimated from noninvasive, intermittent 24  h ABP 
recordings with measurements taken at intervals from 15 to 30 min [17, 18], by Table 28.2 (continued)
CharacteristicVery short-term 
BPV
(beat-by-beat)Short-term BPV
(within 24 h)Midterm BPV
(day-by-day)Long-term BPV
(visit-to-visit)
Disadvantages Stability of 
measurements 
might not be 
guaranteed outside 
the laboratory 
setting. Possibility 
of measurement 
artifacts.ABPM: Cannot be 
repeated frequently.
Not well tolerated.
Not widely 
available Difficult 
to standardize 
subjects’ behavior 
over 24 h.Patients’ 
training required 
for HBPM.
48 h ABPM not 
well tolerated.OBP and HBPM 
provide limited 
information on 
diurnal BP 
profiles.
Based on 
retrospective 
analysis of 
available data.
Taken from Parati et al. [1] modified by permission. BP Blood pressure, BPV Blood pressure varia-
tions, ABPM Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, HBPM Home blood pressure monitoring, 
OBP Office blood pressure, SD Standard deviation, CV Coefficient of variation, ARV  Average real 
variability, VIM Variability independent of the mean
G. Parati and J. E. Ochoa401
calculating 24 h SD, and also the respective SD for the day- and nighttime subpe-
riods [17, 19]. SD represents the most commonly used index for assessment of 
short- term BPV and provides a measure of values dispersion over selected time 
windows (24 h, day and night). SD is affected by trends in BP (e.g., day-night 
change) and increases with increasing average BP values. In order to account for 
such a dependence of SD and other absolute measures of BPV on mean BP levels, 
the coefficient of variation (CV , SD* 100/BP mean) may be computed [19]. 
Weighted 24 h SD (wSD) selectively removes the contribution provided by night-
time BP fall to 24 h SD, by weighting daytime and nighttime BP SD for the dura-
tion of the day- and nighttime periods, respectively, and by averaging the SD of 
these two time subperiods [20]. The corresponding weighted CV may be calcu-
lated as well. Average Real Variability (ARV) is an index of overall variability 
based on readings sequence. It is computed as the average of the absolute differ -
ences between consecutive BP measurements over 24 h. It focuses on the sequence 
of BP readings, thus reflecting short-term, reading-to-reading, within-subject 
 variability in BP values [21]. ARV has been shown to be a more specific estimate 
of 24 h BP variability and a more effective predictor of outcome than SD. Indeed, 
subjects with different 24 h ABP profiles may have similar SD but different ARV 
[21–23]. ARV effectively removes the contribution of trends in mean BP to overall 
BPV and is correlated with mean BP levels. Other indices of overall variability Table 28.3 Indices for estimation of different types of BPV
Overall BPV
Type of index Type of BPV assessed
Frequency:
– Spectral Indices (HF, LF, VLF)
– Residual variabilityShort-term BPV
Very short-term BPV (spectral analysis)
Dispersion:
– Standard Deviation (SD)
– Coefficient of variation (CV)
– Variability Independent of the Mean (VIM)
– Weighted 24 h SD (wSD)aShort-term BPV
Midterm BPV
Long-term BPV
sequential changes:
– Average Real Variability (ARV)
– Interval Weighted SD (wSD)
– Time rate of BP fluctuationsbShort-term BPV
Midterm BPV
Long-term BPV
Instability:
– Range (Maximum-minimum BP)
– Peak size (Maximum BP)
– Trough size (Mean-minimum BP)Short-term BPV
Midterm BPV
Specific patterns of BPV
Nocturnal BP fall
Night/day ratio
Morning Blood Pressure Surge (MBPS)
Afternoon siesta dipping
Postprandial Blood Pressure FallShort-term BPV
aAssessment of Short-term BPV only
bNot for assessment of Short-term BPV28 Blood Pressure Variability402
based on reading sequence include time rate of BP fluctuations (similar to ARV 
but quantified as a function of time to provide information also on speed of BP 
changes) and interval weighted SD (similar to SD), both of which take into 
account the interval between measurements giving larger weight to more distant 
pairs of readings. Variability Independent of the Mean (VIM) excludes the 
effect of mean BP on BPV by applying nonlinear regression analysis (i.e., plotting 
SD against mean) [24]. For its estimation, it requires calculation of a factor x  from 
overall population data. Short-term BP variability may also be assessed by estima-
tion of Instability indices that take into account extreme readings of the distribution 
of BP values within a given time window such as Range (Maximum-Μ inimum 
BP); Peak and Trough values, Peak size (Maximum- Mean BP), and Trough 
size (Mean-Minimum BP). Although some studies have demonstrated their clini-
cal value, a major limitation of these indices is that extreme readings have limited 
reliability within a given distribution of values, including ABPM data, especially 
when focusing on individual subjects, being unstable and prone to show measure-
ment artifacts more than actual BP values.
It is also possible, from 24  h ambulatory BP recordings, to evaluate Specific 
Patterns of BPV associated with the day/night cycle (representing slower fluctua-
tions within a 24 h time period) or with other behavioral factors (i.e., “siesta”). One 
of the most common among these indices of BPV estimated from 24 h ABPM is the 
nocturnal BP fall. The reduction in BP during the night can be expressed as per -
centage of daytime BP [Nocturnal BP fall = (Daytime BP  − Nighttime BP)*100/
Daytime BP)] which is mathematically equivalent to the night/day ratio. When con-
sidering the degree of nocturnal BP fall (dipping) subjects may be classified into 
four different categories: (i) normal dipping (fall in nighttime systolic and diastolic 
BP between 10% and 20%); (ii) non-dipping (or more precisely reduced dipping, 
with a fall in nighttime systolic and diastolic BP <10%); (iii) rising or “inverted dip-
ping” (increase in nighttime BP compared to daytime values); and (iv) extreme 
dipping (BP fall during night >20%) [25].
Another index of short-term BPV that can be estimated from 24 h ABPM and 
which has been suggested to carry a prognostic value is the morning BP surge 
(MBPS). It is computed in different ways, as a function of the different time points 
set by the researcher to define wake and sleep time periods. The most commonly 
employed method is the calculation of the difference between the lowest BP value 
at night and the highest BP value recorded shortly after awakening. However, when 
computed in this way, its correlation with nocturnal BP fall may represent a chal-
lenge in the interpretation of its impact on outcome data. Other patterns of BP varia-
tions that can be evaluated from 24 h ABPM are the Siesta dipping (i.e., the BP fall 
observed in populations where having an afternoon nap (siesta) is a common habit) 
and the Postprandial BP fall which, when excessive, may indicate altered auto-
nomic function. However, up to date, no standards have been provided regarding the 
calculation of these indices.
G. Parati and J. E. Ochoa403
28.2.4  Clinical Significance
Several studies have provided evidence supporting the predictive value of short-  
term BPV either for target organ damage or for cardiovascular events. Most evi-
dence supporting the association of very short- and short-term BPV with target 
organ damage is derived either from cross-sectional studies reporting on such rela-
tionship, or from prospective studies on the predictive value of BPV regarding the 
development and progression of target organ damage [1 ]. Early studies implement-
ing intra-arterial beat-to-beat BP recordings in hypertensive subjects showed that 
at nearly any level of 24 h mean BP, the prevalence and severity of target organ 
damage was higher in subjects with higher 24 h BPV [26], and that BPV at base-
line was a significant predictor of target organ damage, in particular of left ven-
tricular hypertrophy, at the end of follow-up [27]. Regarding the value of short-term 
BPV as assessed from intermittent ABPM recordings, a recent meta-analysis has 
shown a significant, although moderate, association between left ventricular mass 
index and SD of 24 h systolic BP, SD of daytime systolic BP, wSD of 24 h systolic 
BP, and ARV of 24 h systolic BP [28]. Other studies have shown an independent, 
although moderate, relationship between short-term BPV and carotid atherosclero-
sis [29], arterial stiffness, and renal function [7 , 30–32]. However, not all studies 
have reported significant associations [33, 34]. Regarding CV outcomes, several 
studies and analyses of ABPM registries have confirmed the prognostic role of 
short-term BPV . An analysis of the International Database on Ambulatory blood 
pressure in relation to Cardiovascular Outcomes (IDACO) showed a significant 
predictive value for short- term BPV for most outcomes, ARV of 24 h systolic/dia-
stolic ambulatory BP being a better predictor than SD although the independent 
additional contribution of BPV to cardiovascular risk was rated as being of minor 
importance [22]. The analysis of the ABP-International database showed SD of 
nighttime systolic ambulatory BP to be an independent predictor of cardiovascular 
events, cardiovascular death, and all-cause mortality in contrast to daytime values 
[35]. In the Pressioni Arteriose Monitorate e Loro Associazioni (PAMELA) study, 
there was an independent relationship between the risk of death and SD of 24 h, 
daytime, and nighttime BP [36]. Moreover, the adjusted risk of cardiovascular 
death was inversely related to day-night diastolic BP difference and showed a sig-
nificant positive relationship with residual diastolic BPV , as computed by spectral 
powers of 24 h ABP recordings, after removing the contribution of day- night BP 
changes [36]. Accumulating evidence suggests that specific patterns of the diurnal 
BP variation may indeed have an important prognostic role. Nighttime ambulatory 
BP carries superior prognostic value as compared to other components of 24 h 
ABPM [37– 39]. Ιn this context, several studies have investigated whether BP fluc-
tuations occurring from day to night or vice versa may have additional prognostic 
value. More specifically, a non-dipping or even a rising pattern at night have been 
shown to be associated with increased cardiovascular risk, although recent 28 Blood Pressure Variability404
evidence suggests that it is the nighttime average BP level that mainly matters [38]. 
Likewise, an increased morning BP surge is associated with a high incidence of 
cardiovascular events and mortality, but this should be interpreted in the context of 
the significant relationship between the degree of morning BP surge (carrying high 
risk) and the degree of nighttime BP fall (carrying low risk), which may affect 
calculation of the extent of BP rise in the early morning and the interpretation of its 
prognostic value [40, 41].
Evidence on whether short-term BPV might improve cardiovascular risk stratifi-
cation over and above average BP levels has been provided by some studies. While 
in the ABP-International study, the relative integrated discrimination improvement 
for an increased value of the SD of nighttime systolic BP ranged from 8.5% to 
14.5% for cardiovascular and mortality outcomes [35], in the IDACO analysis, ARV 
added only 0.1% to prediction of the risk of a composite cardiovascular event [22]. 
This might have depended, however, on the inclusion of data obtained in different 
populations with different methodology for ambulatory BP monitoring.
Regarding possible threshold values for short-term BPV , evidence has been pro-
vided by some outcome studies. An analysis of the ABP-International database 
showed that a SD of nighttime systolic ambulatory BP ≥12.2 mmHg (compared 
with SD <12.2 mmHg) was associated with greater risk of cardiovascular events 
(41%), cardiovascular death (55%), and all-cause mortality (59%) [35]. The corre-
sponding risk estimates for a SD of diastolic BP ≥7.9 mmHg were 48%, 132%, and 
77% [35]. The IDACO analysis also presented the risk of total and cardiovascular 
mortality by fifths of distribution of ARV showing progressively increased risk 
among quintiles, with higher event rate at systolic/diastolic ARV values of 
16.2/12.4 mmHg, respectively [22].
Studies have also been conducted addressing whether short-term BPV may be 
reduced by specific classes of antihypertensive drugs. In the Natrilix SR Versus 
Candesartan and Amlodipine in the Reduction of Systolic Blood Pressure in 
Hypertensive Patients (X-CELLENT) Study, the effect of different antihypertensive 
agents (candesartan, indapamide sustained release, and amlodipine) as compared to 
placebo on short-term BPV was examined. Amlodipine and indapamide were the 
only agents associated with a significantly decreased short-term BPV after a 
3-month treatment [42]. Another report in hypertensive subjects showed that sub-
jects treated with Calcium Chanel Blockers (CCBs) or diuretics alone, or in addition 
to other drugs, had significantly lower SD of 24 h systolic BP compared with those 
not treated with these drug classes [43].
Since the vast majority of drugs do not have an effect lasting long enough to 
smootly cover the 24 hours, as shown by their trough-to-peak ratio being signifi-
cantly lower than 100%, it is expected that their anti-hypertensive action is dimin-
ished during nighttime and the early morning hours of next day, when a drug is taken 
in the morning. This phenomenon may have important implications for subjects 
with nighttime hypertension, non-dipping profile, and/or pronounced morning 
surge. However, the concept of restoring a disturbed nighttime BP profile with so- 
called “chronotherapy,” i.e., with administration of antihypertensive drugs in the 
evening rather than in the morning, needs to be better supported by evidence.
G. Parati and J. E. Ochoa405
28.3  Midterm BPV
28.3.1  Mechanisms
Behavioral factors such as job strain, levels of physical activity, sleep/wakeful-
ness cycles, quality and duration of sleep, postural changes, patterns of sodium 
intake are likely to play an important role in determining day-by-day BP fluctua-
tions (see Fig.  28.1). This has been clearly exemplified by some studies in which 
significant changes in BP levels between working days and the weekend have 
been reported [44]. Data from several population studies have found a number of 
factors, such as advanced age, female gender, increased arterial stiffness, elevated 
mean BP values, reduced body mass index, low heart rate, high heart rate vari-
ability, excessive alcohol intake, cigarette smoking, history of peripheral artery 
disease, cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, diabetic nephropathy, and sed-
entary lifestyle, to be associated with increased values of day-by-day BPV derived 
from self-BP measurements performed at subjects’ home [8 , 45–49]. Studies 
focusing on treated hypertensive patients have found a higher day-by-day BPV 
among these individuals compared to untreated subjects [46, 48], also reporting 
higher values of home BPV in case of treatment with b-blockers [8 ], short dura-
tion of treatment [50], and increasing number of antihypertensive drugs [49]. In 
such a context a limited adherence of patients to prescribed anti-hypertensive 
regimen is aslo likely to play a role.
28.3.2  Methods for Assessment
A thorough assessment of midterm BPV can be obtained by performing ABPM over 
48 h or repeatedly during a week or a month. However, this approach is limited by 
the fact that ABPM is neither available in all clinical settings, nor is always well 
accepted by patients at such a repetition rate. Although HBPM cannot provide 
extensive information on nighttime BP and 24 h BP profile as ABPM does, it pro-
vides enough BP measures for estimation of day-by-day BPV , devoid of the white- 
coat effect. Besides, HBPM is widely available and well accepted by patients, being 
thus a feasible alternative for the evaluation of day-by-day BPV , in particular if BP 
measurements at home are performed according to current guidelines. Overall, 
HBPM schedule should consist of duplicate morning and evening BP measure-
ments with validated devices for a 7-day period (at least 3  days required) [51]. 
Because of the large heterogeneity among studies in terms of measurement sched-
ules (number of readings, number of days, morning and/or evening), BP measure-
ment devices and indices of BPV assessed, it has not yet been possible to standardize 
an evidence-based approach for assessment of home BPV in clinical practice. 
Table  28.2 resumes some important aspects regarding the assessment of midterm 
BPV in clinical practice.28 Blood Pressure Variability406
28.3.3  Indices for Estimation of Midterm BPV
BP variations in the midterm may be quantified by estimating some of the same 
indices employed for assessment of short-term BP variability such as SD, CV , VIM, 
and ARV described in Table  28.3. Also indices of Instability such as Range 
(Maximum-minimum BP); Peak size (Maximum BP); and Trough size (Mean- 
minimum BP) can be estimated in order to assess midterm BPV .  These indices 
appear to have different strengths and limitations, and evidence regarding the best 
index for estimation of BPV in the midterm is still needed.
28.3.4  Clinical Significance
Although evidence has supported the association between midterm BPV and differ -
ent types of subclinical organ damage, there has not been a single index of BPV nor 
a marker of target organ damage presenting consistent and independent relation-
ships [33, 34, 52–58] (Fig.  28.1). Regarding CV events, the most solid evidence 
supporting the prognostic value of midterm BPV comes from the IDHOCO study 
[59]. An analysis of this database based on day-by-day morning home BP measure-
ments showed all indices of systolic/diastolic BPV (SD, CV , ARV , VIM) to be inde-
pendently associated with all-cause and cardiovascular mortality [59]. A 
meta-analysis by Stevens et al. showed similar hazard ratios for all-cause mortality 
for home day-by-day and for 24 h systolic BPV [HR: 1.12 (95% confidence inter -
vals: 1.05, 1.20); home: 1.15 (1.06, 1.26); 24 h ambulatory: 1.11 (1.04. 1.18)] [60] 
(see Fig. 28.2).
In addition, it appears that morning day-by-day home BPV has the strongest 
prognostic value as compared to morning–evening or evening home BPV [61, 62]. 
Regarding the question on whether midterm BPV may independently add to car -
diovascular risk stratification, the IDHOCO analysis revealed only a minor-  
nonsignificant incremental improvement for home BPV in terms of net 
reclassification and integrated discrimination improvements [59]. The IDHOCO 
study also provided some evidence indicating that the risk of cardiovascular mor -
bidity and mortality was steeply increased in the highest decile of systolic/dia-
stolic home BPV (CV ≥ 11/12.8%, respectively) [59]. Regarding the response of 
midterm BPV to antihypertensive treatment, a study by Matsui et al. showed that 
the olmesartan/azelnidipine compared to olmesartan/hydrochlorothiazide combi-
nation improved home BPV in addition to home BP reduction, and that the reduc-
tion in home BPV was associated with the reduction in the arterial stiffness in the 
group randomized to azelnidipine [56]. In a study by Hoshide et al. the treatment-
induced reduction in urine albumin excretion after a 6-month period of antihyper -
tensive treatment with candesartan (+diuretics) was significantly associated with 
the reduction of average home BP but was not associated with the reduction in the 
SD of home systolic BP nor with the reduction in the value of maximum home 
systolic BP [63].
G. Parati and J. E. Ochoa407
16.47Weight
(%)Hazar d ratio
(95% CI)Hazar d ratio
(95% CI)Variability
measure
Favours
increased
variabilityFavours
decreased
variability
Favours
increased
variabilityFavours
decreased
variabilityFavours
increased
variabilityFavours
decreased
variabilityStud y
Studies meeting methodological critieria
Studies not meeting methodological critieria12.94
16.18
15.28
60.87
0.7 1 1.4 2.52.47
10.47
9.93
16.26SD
SD
SR
SD
SD
CV
VIM
RMSE
39.13
100.001.10 (1.05 to 1.15)
1.29 (1.17 to 1.43)
1.11 (1.06 to 1.17)
1.18 (1.10 to 1.26)
1.15 (1.09 to 1.22)
1.61 (1.06 to 2.43)
1.23 (1.07 to 1.41)
0.95 (0.82 to 1.10)
34.66
65.34
100.001.21 (1.06 to 1.38)
1.15 (1.04 to 1.27)
1.17 (1.08 to 1.27)
24.15
75.85
100.001.17 (0.98 to 1.39)
1.08 (0.98 to 1.19)
1.10 (1.01 to 1.20)
71.74
28.26
100.001.15 (1.04 to 1.28)
1.17 (0.99 to 1.38)
1.15 (1.06 to 1.26)0.98 (0.93 to 1.02)
1.09 (0.93 to 1.27)
1.12 (1.05 to 1.20)Poortvliet51
Hata43
Such y-Dice y18
Muntner50
Subtotal:  P = 0.02, I2 = 70.7%
MCMullan49
Lau16
Hara42
Gao15
Subtotal:  P = 0.002, I2 = 80.2%
Overall:  P = 0.00, I2 = 85.1%
70.16Weight
(%)Hazar d ratio
(95% CI)Hazar d ratio
(95% CI)Variability
measureWeight
(%)Hazar d ratio
(95% CI)Hazar d ratio
(95% CI)
SD
VIM
SD
VIM
SD
SDVariability
measure
Johansson58
Asayama56
Subtotal:  P = 0.52, I2 = 0%
Johansson58
Asayama56
Subtotal:  P = 0.44, I2 = 0%
Kikuy a59
Johansson58
Subtotal:  P = 0.88, I2 = 0%Studies meeting
methodological
critieria
Morning
Evening
Combination
13.47
83.63
0.7 1 1.40.7 1 1.4
16.37
16.37
100.00SD
SD
SD1.10 (1.04 to 1.17)
1.12 (0.97 to 1.28)
1.10 (1.04 to 1.16)
1.12 (0.99 to 1.27)
1.12 (0.99 to 1.27)
1.11 (1.05 to 1.16)Stud y
Studies meeting methodological critieria
Studies not meeting methodological critieriaHansen61
Palatini64
Subtotal:  P = 0.85, I2 = 0%
Mancia62
Subtotal
Overall:  P = 0.95, I2 = 0%
Fig. 28.2 Hazard ratios for all-cause mortality for increases in clinic systolic blood pressure vari-
ability (upper panel); in home systolic blood pressure variability (middle panel) or in variability of 
ambulatory systolic blood pressure (lower panel). Modified from Stevens et al. [60] by permission28 Blood Pressure Variability408
28.4  Long-Term BPV
28.4.1  Mechanisms
Although biological and behavioral factors may contribute to visit-to-visit BPV , 
it may be also importantly affected by treatment-related factors such as inconsis-
tent BP control in subjects receiving treatment for arterial hypertension 
(Fig.  28.1). In particular, poor patient’s adherence to prescribed treatment, 
improper dosing/titration of antihypertensive drugs, dose omission, or delay in 
drug intake during the follow-up period, as well as improper BP measurement 
during assessment of BP control, may all induce important increases in BPV 
from visit to visit [64]. In the frame of large population studies, long-term BPV 
has been found to be associated with advanced age, female gender, insomnia and 
long sleep duration, history of myocardial infarction or stroke, higher mean sys-
tolic BP and pulse pressure [24, 65]. Besides, observational studies have shown 
long-term BPV to be importantly influenced by season-related climatic changes 
[66, 67], and in particular by changes in outdoor temperature [67, 68]. This has 
been supported by the finding that BP levels (either office, ambulatory, or home 
BP) are consistently lower during the summer and higher during the winter [69]. 
However, not only the changes in outdoor temperature but also an improper 
downward titration of antihypertensive drugs on the basis of office BP reductions 
during the summer (with the consequent reduction of the extension of 24 h BP 
coverage) [68] may lead to a paradoxical increase in nighttime BP levels in the 
warmer season.
28.4.2  Methods for Assessment
A series of studies in the past decade have indicated that visit-to-visit BPV is a 
highly reproducible phenomenon with demonstrated predictive value for cardiovas-
cular prognosis [24, 65]. Long-term BPV is most commonly assessed from visit-to- 
visit by conventional BP measurements obtained in the medical office, which are 
characterized, however, by several intrinsic limitations such as the “white-coat 
effect” and may thus not accurately reflect patients’ actual BP profile and 
BPV .  Although ABPM performed on repeated visits might represent an ideal 
approach for the accurate assessment of visit-to-visit BPV in the long-term, this 
technique is not always available and patients may not easily accept its frequent use 
on a regular basis. An optimal, alternative approach to overcome the limitations of 
OBP and ABPM for assessment of long-term BPV might be implementation of 
HBPM over the days preceding each office visit. Although HBPM cannot provide 
the extensive information on BP levels over 24 h as ABPM does, it can provide 
information on BP levels in daily life conditions devoid of the subject’s alarm reac-
tion during the medical visit. In recognition of its advantages and prognostic supe-
riority over OBP, the use of HBPM has been recommended for the long-term 
follow-up of treated hypertensive patients, and might thus be also employed for 
G. Parati and J. E. Ochoa409
assessment of long-term BPV [18, 25, 65, 70–72]. Identifying a standard method to 
obtain reproducible and valid estimates of visit-to-visit BP variability, using either 
OBP or HBPM, has been difficult due to the inconsistency of the available evidence. 
However, a higher number of visits considered for the assessment of visit-to-visit 
BPV has been associated with a greater reproducibility [73] and a stronger prognos-
tic value [24]. Key aspects related to assessment of long-term BPV are presented in 
Table 28.2.
28.4.3  Indices for Estimation of Long-Term BPV
Several of the indices employed for estimation of short-term BPV may be employed 
for assessment of long-term BPV (i.e., SD, CV , ARV , VIM) (Table  28.3). Although 
metrics of long-term BPV are highly correlated to each other, it is not clear which 
metrics are better representative of true long-term BPV [74, 75]. Most studies have 
evaluated classical (i.e., SD and CV) but not novel indices of BPV such as ARV or 
VIM [76]. It is likely that ARV , CV , and SD may reflect different primary determi-
nants of BPV as they are only partly correlated [24]. In the future, clinical trials 
aimed at establishing the relationship of BPV with cardiovascular outcomes, should 
ideally evaluate all metrics of overall, ordered and extreme long-term BPV .
28.4.4  Clinical Significance
The prognostic relevance of visit-to-visit BPV was first emphasized by Rothwell 
et al. [24, 76]. Thereafter, several studies have been conducted supporting the asso-
ciation between long-term BPV with either subclinical organ damage or cardiovas-
cular events. The largest amount of evidence addressing the predictive value of 
long-term BPV for organ damage comes mainly from studies in diabetic patients 
in whom the incidence or the progression of renal dysfunction in relation to long-
term BPV has been documented [47, 77–81]. In one of these studies, visit-to-visit 
BPV , assessed by CV of systolic BP, was associated with a significantly increased 
hazard of developing albuminuria in patients with type 2 diabetes [77]. Visit-to-
visit BPV has also been associated with other indices of subclinical organ damage 
such as left ventricular dysfunction [79, 80], carotid atherosclerosis, and arterial 
stiffness [47, 80, 81]. Regarding the prognostic value of long-term BPV for cardio-
vascular events, the evidence is mainly derived from post hoc analyses of large 
randomized trials and meta-analyses [60, 82, 83]. In one of these reports, visit-to-
visit BPV independently predicted all-cause mortality (HR 1.12, 95%CI 1.05, 
1.20); cardiovascular mortality (HR 1.15, 95%CI 1.03, 1.30); cardiovascular events 
(HR 1.13, 95%CI 1.04, 1.23); coronary heart disease (HR 1.07, 95%CI 1.00, 1.14); 
and stroke (HR 1.19, 95%CI 1.11, 1.27) [60] (see Fig.  28.2). These significant 
associations have led to the question on whether long-term BPV might add to risk 
stratification over and above average BP levels and baseline cardiovascular risk. In 
a recent report of the ADV ANCE-ON study in patients with type 2 diabetes, 28 Blood Pressure Variability410
addition of SD of systolic clinic BP to the prediction model significantly added to 
the 8-year risk prediction beyond the contribution of average systolic BP and other 
traditional risk factors [84]. In another study in patients with cardiovascular dis-
ease, addition of CV of systolic BP resulted in a modest but significant improve-
ment in the prediction model [85]. On the contrary, visit-to-visit BPV did not 
contribute to cardiovascular risk prediction in the ELSA study [86] which how-
ever included middle-aged patients with treated, mild to moderate, systolic-dia-
stolic hypertension at relatively low cardiovascular risk [86]. Very recently an 
analysis of the V ALUE (Valsartan Antihypertensive Long-term Use Evaluation) 
study reported an increased risk of cardiovascular events [HR: 2.1, 95% CI 1.7–
2.4; P < 0.0001] for patients in the highest quintile of visit-to-visit BPV and a 10% 
increase in the risk of death (HR 1.10, 95% CI 1.04–1.17; P = 0.002) for a 5 mmHg 
increase in SD of systolic BP [87].
Despite the large amount of evidence on the prognostic value of long-term BPV , 
there is no specific suggestion of thresholds for its clinical application, at present. 
The largest study addressing the clinical value of long-term BPV reported the risk 
of cardiovascular events among quartiles of SD of SBP with an incremental risk for 
SD quartiles 2 through 4 for all-cause mortality, coronary heart disease, stroke, and 
end-stage renal disease [88]. The SD of systolic BP which corresponded to the high-
est quartile was 15.6 mmHg [88].
The question on whether long-term BPV might be modulated by antihyperten-
sive treatment and whether this might be translated into improved CV prognosis 
has been addressed by post hoc analyses of randomized clinical trials. Overall, 
these reports have indicated a favorable effect of CCBs versus other drugs, espe-
cially beta-blockers, in reducing visit-to-visit BPV and the risk of stroke. In par -
ticular, the post hoc analysis of the Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial 
Blood Pressure Lowering Arm (ASCOT-BPLA) showed that amlodipine- based 
compared to atenolol-based regimen was associated with a greater reduction in 
outcome, with a greater effect of CCBs versus other drugs, especially beta-block-
ers, in reducing visit-to-visit BPV [76]. In addition, a meta-analysis by Webb 
et  al. [89] showed that compared to other drugs, interindividual variability in 
systolic BP was reduced by CCBs and by non- loop diuretic drugs, and increased 
by renin-angiotensin system blockers and beta- blockers [89]. This finding is of 
interest, although reduction in interindividual BPV cannot be considered as an 
acceptable surrogate for a reduction in within-individual BPV . Compared to pla-
cebo, CCBs were the most effective drug class to reduce interindividual variabil-
ity in systolic BP [89]. In another recent meta-analysis of five studies, amlodipine 
was found to be more effective than other active comparators in reducing intra-
individual visit-to-visit BPV [90]. The benefits of treatment- induced changes in 
BPV were reported in the ASCOT-BLA study, in which the reduction in the risk 
of stroke was partly attributed to the reduction of BPV [76]. In the same line, in 
the meta-analysis by Webb et al. the reduction in the risk of stroke was attributed 
not only to the reduction of average systolic BP, but also to the reduction of inter -
individual systolic BPV [89].
G. Parati and J. E. Ochoa411
28.5  Blood Pressure Variability and Prehypertension
Many of the mechanisms associated with an increased BPV (i.e., Autonomic dys-
function, RAAS system dysregulation) have also been reported to be present with a 
higher frequency in subjects with prehypertension (high normal BP) than in sub-
jects with normotension. Compared to normotensives, subjects with prehyperten-
sion or high normal office BP are characterized by a higher number of abnormally 
elevated BP readings (i.e., a higher BP load) in ambulatory conditions, in spite of 
the finding of office BP values still within normal ranges. Besides, patients with a 
higher degree of BP elevation in response to the alarm reaction elicited by the medi-
cal visit (i.e., white-coat effect) and those with white-coat hypertension (high office 
BP levels, but normal out of office BP levels) have been shown to be at a higher risk 
of developing sustained hypertension as indicated by several population studies [91, 
92] leading to consider this condition as a prehypertensive state [93]. Clinical and 
experimental studies have also indicated that the magnitude of the BP response to 
static muscle contraction in prehypertensive subjects is exaggerated compared to 
normotensive subjects [94] and most (but not all) studies have shown an excessive 
BP rise during exercise to be predictive of development of hypertension indepen-
dently of BP at rest [95, 96]. Along this line of thinking, it is likely that increases in 
BP variability and the associated alterations in BP regulation might predict develop-
ment of future hypertension, in particular in prehypertensive subjects. Identification 
of subjects with normal office and/or average ABP values but with increased BPV , 
who could theoretically be at a higher risk of future sustained hypertension as com-
pared to subjects with sustained normotension, might allow implementation of early 
interventions aimed at improving subjects’ lifestyle and at detecting/preventing 
subclinical organ damage at an early stage [97, 98]. However, the evidence from 
studies directly aimed at evaluating the predictive value of an increased BPV for 
development of hypertension is limited if not absent. Besides, if considered that 
average BP levels and BPV are affected by significant collinearity (i.e., increasing 
average BP levels are associated with increasing BPV), determining whether an 
increased BPV precedes BP elevation or vice versa becomes a challenge based on 
the available studies. Finally, it has to be considered that in the recent 2017 American 
Heart Association/American College of Cardiology guidelines for hypertension 
management, the condition formerly defined as “prehypertension” is now defined as 
“stage 1 hypertension,” because of the evidence of an increased risk of events in 
such a BP range [99], which may imply the need for a re-assessment also of the 
possible role of BPV in this context.
Conclusions
Accumulating evidence supports the concept that an increased BPV may contrib-
ute to cardiovascular risk prediction over and above the impact of average BP 
levels. These findings suggest the possible usefulness of assessing BPV in clini-
cal practice and of considering an elevated BPV as a possible target for treatment 
to further improve prognosis. However, although several indices of BPV have 
been shown to be of prognostic value, no interventional longitudinal outcome 28 Blood Pressure Variability412
study has yet been conducted specifically addressing a number of important issues 
in this field, namely which the best BPV index to be considered in clinical prac-
tice could be, what BPV levels should be regarded as normal, or which BPV level 
should be achieved by antihypertensive treatment. Similarly, no intervention 
study has yet explored the key question of whether a reduction in BPV by treat-
ment translates into a better outcome. Regarding the type of BPV that should be 
considered in clinical practice (short term, midterm, or long term), the poor cor -
relation and agreement between indices of short-term (24 h) and long-term vari-
ability indicate that they may reflect different pathophysiological and clinical 
phenomena and may thus not be interchangeable, but rather represent comple-
mentary  variables to be separately quantified. Whether assessing BPV could 
improve the prediction of future hypertension, thus improving the management of 
subjects with high normal office BP elevation/prehypertension is still a question 
to be properly evaluated in future studies, too.
In conclusion, although an increased BPV , in the different time windows con-
sidered in this paper, represents a phenomenon characterizing daily clinical prac-
tice which should not be disregarded, it is not yet possible to provide clear 
recommendations regarding its interpretation either as an additional independent 
risk predictor nor as a possible new target for treatment. More research is therefore 
still needed in this field, and the importance to further explore these issues is clearly 
emphasized by the huge amount of data on the association between increase in size 
of different BPV indices and adverse outcome provided by available experimetnal 
studies in animals, observational studies in humans and meta-analyses of random-
ized clinical trials.   
References
 1. Parati G, Ochoa JE, Lombardi C, Bilo G. Assessment and management of blood-pressure vari-
ability. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2013;10(3):143–55.
 2. Mancia G, Parati G, Pomidossi G, Casadei R, Di Rienzo M, Zanchetti A. Arterial baroreflexes 
and blood pressure and heart rate variabilities in humans. Hypertension. 1986;8(2):147–53.
 3. Parati G, Saul JP, Di Rienzo M, Mancia G.  Spectral analysis of blood pressure and heart 
rate variability in evaluating cardiovascular regulation. A critical appraisal. Hypertension. 
1995;25(6):1276–86.
 4. Narkiewicz K, Winnicki M, Schroeder K, Phillips BG, Kato M, Cwalina E, et al. Relationship 
between muscle sympathetic nerve activity and diurnal blood pressure profile. Hypertension. 
2002;39(1):168–72.
 5. Parati G, Faini A, Valentini M. Blood pressure variability: its measurement and significance in 
hypertension. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2006;8(3):199–204.
 6. Kotsis V , Stabouli S, Karafillis I, Papakatsika S, Rizos Z, Miyakis S, et al. Arterial stiffness 
and 24 h ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in young healthy volunteers: the early vas-
cular ageing Aristotle University Thessaloniki Study (EV A-ARIS Study). Atherosclerosis. 
2011;219(1):194–9.
 7. Schillaci G, Bilo G, Pucci G, Laurent S, Macquin-Mavier I, Boutouyrie P, et al. Relationship 
between short-term blood pressure variability and large-artery stiffness in human hyperten-
sion: findings from 2 large databases. Hypertension. 2012;60(2):369–77.
G. Parati and J. E. Ochoa413
 8. Okada H, Fukui M, Tanaka M, Inada S, Mineoka Y , Nakanishi N, et al. Visit-to-visit variabil-
ity in systolic blood pressure is correlated with diabetic nephropathy and atherosclerosis in 
patients with type 2 diabetes. Atherosclerosis. 2012;220(1):155–9.
 9. Grassi G, Seravalle G, Quarti-Trevano F, Dell’Oro R, Bombelli M, Cuspidi C, et al. Adrenergic, 
metabolic, and reflex abnormalities in reverse and extreme dipper hypertensives. Hypertension. 
2008;52(5):925–31.
 10. Fujii T, Uzu T, Nishimura M, Takeji M, Kuroda S, Nakamura S, et  al. Circadian rhythm 
of natriuresis is disturbed in nondipper type of essential hypertension. Am J Kidney Dis. 
1999;33(1):29–35.
 11. Verdecchia P, Schillaci G, Gatteschi C, Zampi I, Battistelli M, Bartoccini C, et al. Blunted noc-
turnal fall in blood pressure in hypertensive women with future cardiovascular morbid events. 
Circulation. 1993;88(3):986–92.
 12. Haynes WG. Role of leptin in obesity-related hypertension. Exp Physiol. 2005;90(5):683–8.
 13. Quinaglia T, Martins LC, Figueiredo VN, Santos RC, Yugar-Toledo JC, Martin JF, et al. Non- 
dipping pattern relates to endothelial dysfunction in patients with uncontrolled resistant hyper -
tension. J Hum Hypertens. 2011;25(11):656–64.
 14. Holt-Lunstad J, Steffen PR. Diurnal cortisol variation is associated with nocturnal blood pres-
sure dipping. Psychosom Med. 2007;69(4):339–43.
 15. Panarelli M, Terzolo M, Piovesan A, Osella G, Paccotti P, Pinna G, et al. 24-hour profiles of 
blood pressure and heart rate in Cushing’s syndrome. Evidence for differential control of car -
diovascular variables by glucocorticoids. Ann Ital Med Int. 1990;5(1):18–25.
 16. Mancia G, Parati G, di Rienzo M, Zanchetti A.  Blood pressure variability. In: Mancia G, 
Zanchetti A, editors. Handbook of hypertension: pathophysiology of hypertension. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier Science; 1997. p. 117–69.
 17. Mancia G, Di Rienzo M, Parati G. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring use in hypertension 
research and clinical practice. Hypertension. 1993;21(4):510–24.
 18. Parati G, Ochoa JE, Bilo G. Blood pressure variability, cardiovascular risk, and risk for renal 
disease progression. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2012;14(5):421–31.
 19. di Rienzo M, Grassi G, Pedotti A, Mancia G. Continuous vs intermittent blood pressure mea-
surements in estimating 24-hour average blood pressure. Hypertension. 1983;5(2):264–9.
 20. Bilo G, Giglio A, Styczkiewicz K, Caldara G, Maronati A, Kawecka-Jaszcz K, et al. A new 
method for assessing 24-h blood pressure variability after excluding the contribution of noc-
turnal blood pressure fall. J Hypertens. 2007;25(10):2058–66.
 21. Mena L, Pintos S, Queipo NV , Aizpurua JA, Maestre G, Sulbaran T. A reliable index for the 
prognostic significance of blood pressure variability. J Hypertens. 2005;23(3):505–11.
 22. Hansen TW, Thijs L, Li Y , Boggia J, Kikuya M, Bjorklund-Bodegard K, et al. Prognostic value 
of reading-to-reading blood pressure variability over 24 hours in 8938 subjects from 11 popu-
lations. Hypertension. 2010;55(4):1049–57.
 23. O’Brien E, Parati G, Stergiou G, Asmar R, Beilin L, Bilo G, et  al. European Society of 
Hypertension position paper on ambulatory blood pressure monitoring. J Hypertens. 
2013;31(9):1731–68.
 24. Rothwell PM, Howard SC, Dolan E, O'Brien E, Dobson JE, Dahlof B, et al. Prognostic sig-
nificance of visit-to-visit variability, maximum systolic blood pressure, and episodic hyperten-
sion. Lancet. 2010;375(9718):895–905.
 25. Pickering TG, Hall JE, Appel LJ, Falkner BE, Graves J, Hill MN, et al. Recommendations 
for blood pressure measurement in humans and experimental animals: Part 1: blood pressure 
measurement in humans: a statement for professionals from the Subcommittee of Professional 
and Public Education of the American Heart Association Council on High Blood Pressure 
Research. Hypertension. 2005;45(1):142–61.
 26. Parati G, Pomidossi G, Albini F, Malaspina D, Mancia G. Relationship of 24-hour blood pres-
sure mean and variability to severity of target-organ damage in hypertension. J Hypertens. 
1987;5(1):93–8.
 27. Frattola A, Parati G, Cuspidi C, Albini F, Mancia G. Prognostic value of 24-hour blood pres-
sure variability. J Hypertens. 1993;11(10):1133–7.28 Blood Pressure Variability414
 28. Madden JM, O’Flynn AM, Fitzgerald AP, Kearney PM.  Correlation between short-term 
blood pressure variability and left-ventricular mass index: a meta-analysis. Hypertens Res. 
2016;39(3):171–7.
 29. Mancia G, Parati G, Hennig M, Flatau B, Omboni S, Glavina F, et  al. Relation between 
blood pressure variability and carotid artery damage in hypertension: baseline data from the 
European Lacidipine Study on Atherosclerosis (ELSA). J Hypertens. 2001;19(11):1981–9.
 30. Shintani Y , Kikuya M, Hara A, Ohkubo T, Metoki H, Asayama K, et al. Ambulatory blood pres-
sure, blood pressure variability and the prevalence of carotid artery alteration: the Ohasama 
study. J Hypertens. 2007;25(8):1704–10.
 31. Tatasciore A, Renda G, Zimarino M, Soccio M, Bilo G, Parati G, et al. Awake systolic blood 
pressure variability correlates with target-organ damage in hypertensive subjects. Hypertension. 
2007;50(2):325–32.
 32. Manios E, Tsagalis G, Tsivgoulis G, Barlas G, Koroboki E, Michas F, et  al. Time rate of 
blood pressure variation is associated with impaired renal function in hypertensive patients. J 
Hypertens. 2009;27(11):2244–8.
 33. Veloudi P, Blizzard CL, Head GA, Abhayaratna WP, Stowasser M, Sharman JE. Blood pres-
sure variability and prediction of target organ damage in patients with uncomplicated hyper -
tension. Am J Hypertens. 2016;29(9):1046–54.
 34. Wei FF, Li Y , Zhang L, Xu TY , Ding FH, Wang JG, et al. Beat-to-beat, reading-to-reading, 
and day-to-day blood pressure variability in relation to organ damage in untreated Chinese. 
Hypertension. 2014;63(4):790–6.
 35. Palatini P, Reboldi G, Beilin LJ, Casiglia E, Eguchi K, Imai Y , et al. Added predictive value of 
night-time blood pressure variability for cardiovascular events and mortality: the Ambulatory 
Blood Pressure-International Study. Hypertension. 2014;64(3):487–93.
 36. Mancia G, Bombelli M, Facchetti R, Madotto F, Corrao G, Trevano FQ, et  al. Long-term 
prognostic value of blood pressure variability in the general population: results of the Pressioni 
Arteriose Monitorate e Loro Associazioni Study. Hypertension. 2007;49(6):1265–70.
 37. Niiranen TJ, Maki J, Puukka P, Karanko H, Jula AM. Office, home, and ambulatory blood 
pressures as predictors of cardiovascular risk. Hypertension. 2014;64(2):281–6.
 38. Hansen TW, Li Y , Boggia J, Thijs L, Richart T, Staessen JA. Predictive role of the nighttime 
blood pressure. Hypertension. 2011;57(1):3–10.
 39. Fagard RH, Celis H, Thijs L, Staessen JA, Clement DL, De Buyzere ML, et al. Daytime and 
nighttime blood pressure as predictors of death and cause-specific cardiovascular events in 
hypertension. Hypertension. 2008;51(1):55–61.
 40. Metoki H, Ohkubo T, Kikuya M, Asayama K, Obara T, Hashimoto J, et al. Prognostic sig-
nificance for stroke of a morning pressor surge and a nocturnal blood pressure decline: the 
Ohasama study. Hypertension. 2006;47(2):149–54.
 41. Kario K, Pickering TG, Umeda Y , Hoshide S, Hoshide Y , Morinari M, et al. Morning surge in 
blood pressure as a predictor of silent and clinical cerebrovascular disease in elderly hyperten-
sives: a prospective study. Circulation. 2003;107(10):1401–6.
 42. Zhang Y , Agnoletti D, Safar ME, Blacher J. Effect of antihypertensive agents on blood pressure 
variability: the Natrilix SR versus candesartan and amlodipine in the reduction of systolic blood 
pressure in hypertensive patients (X-CELLENT) study. Hypertension. 2011;58(2):155–60.
 43. Levi-Marpillat N, Macquin-Mavier I, Tropeano AI, Parati G, Maison P. Antihypertensive drug 
classes have different effects on short-term blood pressure variability in essential hypertension. 
Hypertens Res. 2014;37(6):585–90.
 44. Murakami S, Otsuka K, Kubo Y , Shinagawa M, Matsuoka O, Yamanaka T, et  al. Weekly 
variation of home and ambulatory blood pressure and relation between arterial stiffness and 
blood pressure measurements in community-dwelling hypertensives. Clin Exp Hypertens. 
2005;27:231–9.
 45. Niiranen TJ, Hanninen MR, Johansson J, Reunanen A, Jula AM. Home-measured blood pres-
sure is a stronger predictor of cardiovascular risk than office blood pressure: the Finn-Home 
study. Hypertension. 2010;55(6):1346–51.
G. Parati and J. E. Ochoa415
 46. Thijs L, Staessen JA, Celis H, Fagard R, De Cort P, de Gaudemaris R, et al. The international 
database of self-recorded blood pressures in normotensive and untreated hypertensive sub-
jects. Blood Press Monit. 1999;4(2):77–86.
 47. Nagai M, Hoshide S, Ishikawa J, Shimada K, Kario K. Visit-to-visit blood pressure variations: 
new independent determinants for carotid artery measures in the elderly at high risk of cardio-
vascular disease. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2011;5(3):184–92.
 48. Niiranen TJ, Asayama K, Thijs L, Johansson JK, Ohkubo T, Kikuya M, et al. Outcome-driven 
thresholds for home blood pressure measurement: international database of home blood pres-
sure in relation to cardiovascular outcome. Hypertension. 2013;61(1):27–34.
 49. Okada T, Nakao T, Matsumoto H, Nagaoka Y , Tomaru R, Iwasawa H, et al. [Day-by-day vari-
ability of home blood pressure in patients with chronic kidney disease]. Nihon Jinzo Gakkai 
Shi 2008;50(5):588–596.
 50. Ishikura K, Obara T, Kato T, Kikuya M, Shibamiya T, Shinki T, et al. Associations between 
day-by-day variability in blood pressure measured at home and antihypertensive drugs: the 
J-HOME-Morning study. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2012;34(4):297–304.
 51. Parati G, Stergiou GS, Asmar R, Bilo G, de Leeuw P, Imai Y , et  al. European Society of 
Hypertension guidelines for blood pressure monitoring at home: a summary report of 
the Second International Consensus Conference on Home Blood Pressure Monitoring. J 
Hypertens. 2008;26(8):1505–26.
 52. Stergiou GS, Ntineri A, Kollias A, Ohkubo T, Imai Y , Parati G.  Blood pressure variability 
assessed by home measurements: a systematic review. Hypertens Res. 2014;37(6):565–72.
 53. Shibasaki S, Hoshide S, Eguchi K, Ishikawa J, Kario K, Japan Morning Surge-Home Blood 
Pressure Study Group. Increase trend in home blood pressure on a single occasion is associated 
with B-type natriuretic peptide and the estimated glomerular filtration rate. Am J Hypertens. 
2015;28(9):1098–105.
 54. Ushigome E, Fukui M, Hamaguchi M, Tanaka T, Atsuta H, Mogami S, et al. Maximum home 
systolic blood pressure is a useful indicator of arterial stiffness in patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus: post hoc analysis of a cross-sectional multicenter study. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 
2014;105(3):344–51.
 55. Liu Z, Zhao Y , Lu F, Zhang H, Diao Y . Day-by-day variability in self-measured blood pres-
sure at home: effects on carotid artery atherosclerosis, brachial flow-mediated dilation, and 
endothelin-1 in normotensive and mild-moderate hypertensive individuals. Blood Press Monit. 
2013;18(6):316–25.
 56. Matsui Y , O'Rourke MF, Hoshide S, Ishikawa J, Shimada K, Kario K. Combined effect of 
angiotensin II receptor blocker and either a calcium channel blocker or diuretic on day-by- 
day variability of home blood pressure: the Japan Combined Treatment With Olmesartan and 
a Calcium-Channel Blocker Versus Olmesartan and Diuretics Randomized Efficacy Study. 
Hypertension. 2012;59(6):1132–8.
 57. Ushigome E, Fukui M, Hamaguchi M, Senmaru T, Sakabe K, Tanaka M, et al. The coefficient 
variation of home blood pressure is a novel factor associated with macroalbuminuria in type 2 
diabetes mellitus. Hypertens Res. 2011;34(12):1271–5.
 58. Matsui Y , Ishikawa J, Eguchi K, Shibasaki S, Shimada K, Kario K. Maximum value of home 
blood pressure: a novel indicator of target organ damage in hypertension. Hypertension. 
2011;57(6):1087–93.
 59. Juhanoja EP, Niiranen TJ, Johansson JK, Puukka PJ, Thijs L, Asayama K, et al. Outcome-driven 
thresholds for increased home blood pressure variability. Hypertension. 2017;69(4):599–607.
 60. Stevens SL, Wood S, Koshiaris C, Law K, Glasziou P, Stevens RJ, et al. Blood pressure vari-
ability and cardiovascular disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2016;354:i4098.
 61. Johansson JK, Niiranen TJ, Puukka PJ, Jula AM. Prognostic value of the variability in home-
measured blood pressure and heart rate: the Finn-Home Study. Hypertension. 2012;59(2):212–8.
 62. Ohkubo T, Asayama K, Kikuya M, Metoki H, Hoshi H, Hashimoto J, et al. How many times 
should blood pressure be measured at home for better prediction of stroke risk? Ten-year fol-
low- up results from the Ohasama study. J Hypertens. 2004;22(6):1099–104.28 Blood Pressure Variability416
 63. Hoshide S, Yano Y , Shimizu M, Eguchi K, Ishikawa J, Kario K. Is home blood pressure vari-
ability itself an interventional target beyond lowering mean home blood pressure during anti- 
hypertensive treatment? Hypertens Res. 2012;35(8):862–6.
 64. Mancia G, Facchetti R, Parati G, Zanchetti A. Visit-to-visit blood pressure variability in the 
European Lacidipine Study on Atherosclerosis: methodological aspects and effects of antihy-
pertensive treatment. J Hypertens. 2012;30(6):1241–51.
 65. Muntner P, Shimbo D, Tonelli M, Reynolds K, Arnett DK, Oparil S. The relationship between 
visit-to-visit variability in systolic blood pressure and all-cause mortality in the general popu-
lation: findings from NHANES III, 1988 to 1994. Hypertension. 2011;57(2):160–6.
 66. Myers MG, Godwin M, Dawes M, Kiss A, Tobe SW, Grant FC, et al. Conventional versus 
automated measurement of blood pressure in primary care patients with systolic hypertension: 
randomised parallel design controlled trial. BMJ. 2011;342:d286.
 67. Stergiou GS, Myrsilidi A, Kollias A, Destounis A, Roussias L, Kalogeropoulos P. Seasonal 
variation in meteorological parameters and office, ambulatory and home blood pressure: pre-
dicting factors and clinical implications. Hypertens Res. 2015;38(12):869–75.
 68. Modesti PA, Morabito M, Bertolozzi I, Massetti L, Panci G, Lumachi C, et al. Weather-related 
changes in 24-hour blood pressure profile: effects of age and implications for hypertension 
management. Hypertension. 2006;47(2):155–61.
 69. Sega R, Cesana G, Bombelli M, Grassi G, Stella ML, Zanchetti A, et al. Seasonal variations 
in home and ambulatory blood pressure in the PAMELA population. Pressione Arteriose 
Monitorate E Loro Associazioni. J Hypertens. 1998;16(11):1585–92.
 70. Mancia G, De Backer G, Dominiczak A, Cifkova R, Fagard R, Germano G, et al. Guidelines 
for the Management of Arterial Hypertension: The Task Force for the Management of Arterial 
Hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of 
Cardiology (ESC). J Hypertens. 2007;25(6):1105–87.
 71. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, et al. Seventh 
report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of 
High Blood Pressure. Hypertension. 2003;42(6):1206–52.
 72. O’Brien E, Asmar R, Beilin L, Imai Y , Mallion JM, Mancia G, et al. European Society of 
Hypertension recommendations for conventional, ambulatory and home blood pressure mea-
surement. J Hypertens. 2003;21(5):821–48.
 73. Muntner P, Joyce C, Levitan EB, Holt E, Shimbo D, Webber LS, et al. Reproducibility of visit- 
to- visit variability of blood pressure measured as part of routine clinical care. J Hypertens. 
2011;29(12):2332–8.
 74. Levitan EB, Kaciroti N, Oparil S, Julius S, Muntner P. Relationships between metrics of visit- 
to- visit variability of blood pressure. J Hum Hypertens. 2013;27(10):589–93.
 75. Levitan EB, Kaciroti N, Oparil S, Julius S, Muntner P. Blood pressure measurement device, 
number and timing of visits, and intra-individual visit-to-visit variability of blood pressure. J 
Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2012;14(11):744–50.
 76. Rothwell PM, Howard SC, Dolan E, O'Brien E, Dobson JE, Dahlof B, et al. Effects of beta 
blockers and calcium-channel blockers on within-individual variability in blood pressure and 
risk of stroke. Lancet Neurol. 2010;9(5):469–80.
 77. Okada H, Fukui M, Tanaka M, Matsumoto S, Mineoka Y , Nakanishi N, et al. Visit-to-visit 
blood pressure variability is a novel risk factor for the development and progression of diabetic 
nephropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2013;36(7):1908–12.
 78. Parati G, Liu X, Ochoa JE.  Clinical relevance of visit-to-visit blood pressure variability: 
impact on renal outcomes. J Hum Hypertens. 2014;28(7):403–9.
 79. Masugata H, Senda S, Murao K, Inukai M, Hosomi N, Iwado Y , et al. Visit-to-visit variability 
in blood pressure over a 1-year period is a marker of left ventricular diastolic dysfunction in 
treated hypertensive patients. Hypertens Res. 2011;34(7):846–50.
 80. Okada R, Okada A, Okada T, Nanasato M, Wakai K. Visit-to-visit blood pressure variability 
is a marker of cardiac diastolic function and carotid atherosclerosis. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 
2014;14:188.
G. Parati and J. E. Ochoa417
 81. Tedla YG, Yano Y , Carnethon M, Greenland P. Association between long-term blood pressure 
variability and 10-year progression in arterial stiffness: the multiethnic study of atherosclero-
sis. Hypertension. 2017;69(1):118–27.
 82. Wang J, Shi X, Ma C, Zheng H, Xiao J, Bian H, et al. Visit-to-visit blood pressure variability is 
a risk factor for all-cause mortality and cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. J Hypertens. 2017;35(1):10–7.
 83. Diaz KM, Tanner RM, Falzon L, Levitan EB, Reynolds K, Shimbo D, et  al. Visit-to-visit 
variability of blood pressure and cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Hypertension. 2014;64(5):965–82.
 84. Ohkuma T, Woodward M, Jun M, Muntner P, Hata J, Colagiuri S, et al. Prognostic value of 
variability in systolic blood pressure related to vascular events and premature death in type 2 
diabetes mellitus: the ADV ANCE-ON study. Hypertension. 2017;70(2):461–8.
 85. Blacher J, Safar ME, Ly C, Szabo de Edelenyi F, Hercberg S, Galan P.  Blood pressure 
variability: cardiovascular risk integrator or independent risk factor? J Hum Hypertens. 
2015;29(2):122–6.
 86. Mancia G, Facchetti R, Parati G, Zanchetti A. Visit-to-visit blood pressure variability, carotid 
atherosclerosis, and cardiovascular events in the European Lacidipine Study on Atherosclerosis. 
Circulation. 2012;126(5):569–78.
 87. Mehlum MH, Liestol K, Kjeldsen SE, Julius S, Hua TA, Rothwell PM, et al. Blood pressure 
variability and risk of cardiovascular events and death in patients with hypertension and differ -
ent baseline risks. Eur Heart J. 2018. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehx760.
 88. Gosmanova EO, Mikkelsen MK, Molnar MZ, Lu JL, Yessayan LT, Kalantar-Zadeh K, et al. 
Association of systolic blood pressure variability with mortality, coronary heart disease, 
stroke, and renal disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68(13):1375–86.
 89. Webb AJ, Fischer U, Mehta Z, Rothwell PM. Effects of antihypertensive-drug class on interin-
dividual variation in blood pressure and risk of stroke: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Lancet. 2010;375(9718):906–15.
 90. Wang JG, Yan P, Jeffers BW. Effects of amlodipine and other classes of antihypertensive drugs 
on long-term blood pressure variability: evidence from randomized controlled trials. J Am Soc 
Hypertens. 2014;8(5):340–9.
 91. Mancia G, Bombelli M, Facchetti R, Madotto F, Quarti-Trevano F, Polo Friz H, et al. Long- 
term risk of sustained hypertension in white-coat or masked hypertension. Hypertension. 
2009;54(2):226–32.
 92. Siven SS, Niiranen TJ, Kantola IM, Jula AM.  White-coat and masked hypertension as 
risk factors for progression to sustained hypertension: the Finn-Home study. J Hypertens. 
2016;34(1):54–60.
 93. Bidlingmeyer I, Burnier M, Bidlingmeyer M, Waeber B, Brunner HR. Isolated office hyperten-
sion: a prehypertensive state? J Hypertens. 1996;14(3):327–32.
 94. Kim KA, Stebbins CL, Choi HM, Nho H, Kim JK.  Mechanisms Underlying Exaggerated 
Metaboreflex Activation in Prehypertensive Men. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2015;47(8):1605–12.
 95. Le VV , Mitiku T, Sungar G, Myers J, Froelicher V . The blood pressure response to dynamic 
exercise testing: a systematic review. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2008;51(2):135–60.
 96. Holmqvist L, Mortensen L, Kanckos C, Ljungman C, Mehlig K, Manhem K. Exercise blood 
pressure and the risk of future hypertension. J Hum Hypertens. 2012;26(12):691–5.
 97. Zachariah PK, Sheps SG, Bailey KR, Wiltgen CM, Moore AG. Age-related characteristics of 
ambulatory blood pressure load and mean blood pressure in normotensive subjects. JAMA. 
1991;265(11):1414–7.
 98. White WB. Blood pressure load and target organ effects in patients with essential hyperten-
sion. J Hypertens Suppl. 1991;9(8):S39–41.
 99. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, Casey DE Jr, Collins KJ, Dennison Himmelfarb C, et al. 
2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guideline for the 
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults: a report 
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 2017. https://doi.org/10.1161/HYP.0000000000000065.28 Blood Pressure Variability419 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_29
A. Ntineri · A. Kollias · G. S. Stergiou ( *) 
Hypertension Center STRIDE-7, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, School of 
Medicine, Third Department of Medicine, Sotiria Hospital, Athens, Greece
e-mail: gstergi@med.uoa.gr29Home Blood Pressure Monitoring 
in Prehypertension and Hypertension
Angeliki Ntineri, Anastasios Kollias, and George S. Stergiou
29.1  Introduction
In the last two decades, considerable evidence on home blood pressure (BP) moni-
toring has accumulated, and current guidelines recommend its wide application in 
clinical practice. Although conventional BP measurement in the office remains the 
basis for hypertension diagnosis and management, it is recognized that this method 
might often be misleading in both untreated and treated subjects, mainly due to the 
white-coat and masked hypertension phenomena [1–5]. Thus, for a reliable assess-
ment of BP status, the evaluation of out-of-office BP is necessary. These methods 
are ambulatory and home BP monitoring, which both provide multiple measure-
ments taken in the individual’s usual environment. However, they have also impor -
tant differences in their role in the clinical management of hypertension and are 
therefore regarded as complementary rather than interchangeable methods.
This chapter presents the considerable potential of home BP monitoring as a tool 
for the initial evaluation of BP levels, for treatment initiation and adjustment, as 
well as for long-term follow-up of treated individuals [1–5].
29.2  Advantages and Disadvantages
29.2.1  Advantages
There are important advantages of home BP monitoring compared to the conven-
tional office measurements and in some aspects also to ambulatory monitoring 420
(Table  29.1). As is the case with ambulatory BP monitoring, home monitoring pro-
vides more detailed information on BP behavior by obtaining multiple readings 
taken in the usual environment of each individual, away from the stressful office 
setting. Thus, home BP can detect the white-coat and masked hypertension phe-
nomena, which are major limitations of the conventional office BP [1, 3, 6]. Home 
and ambulatory BP monitoring are devoid of the placebo effect, which limits the 
reliability of office BP measurements to accurately quantify treatment-induced BP 
changes in clinical research and in practice [7]. Furthermore, using automated elec-
tronic BP devices and the oscillometric technique, the intra- and interobserver error 
(including the terminal digit preference, usually 5 or 0) and the observer prejudice 
and bias (the observer adjusts the recorded BP according to his/her expectations), 
which are known drawbacks of auscultatory office BP measurements, are all avoided 
[8]. In addition, home BP readings can be obtained over a period of several days, 
weeks, or even months in the long-term follow-up of treated hypertensives, whereas 
ambulatory BP monitoring is crowded into 24 h and is rather difficult to perform in 
repeated sessions.
Studies have shown that home BP have similar reproducibility to ambulatory BP 
and superior to that of office BP, a characteristic that increases the statistical power 
of clinical trials allowing the inclusion of a smaller sample size than when using 
office BP measurements [9]. Home BP appears to have similar diagnostic ability as 
ambulatory BP, with the observed diagnostic disagreement between the two meth-
ods mainly due to the imperfect reproducibility of the two methods [10].
Home BP monitoring is well accepted by most patients and preferred to ambula-
tory monitoring, as it entails less discomfort and minimal restrictions on daily Table 29.1 Advantages of home blood pressure
Advantages of home compared to office blood pressure
• Multiple measurements in several days, weeks, or months and in usual environment
• Detection of white-coat and masked hypertension phenomena
• Superior reproducibility—improves power of clinical trials
•  Devoid of observer error and bias (automated devices with memory or PC link capacity or 
home blood pressure tele-monitoring)
• Devoid of placebo effect
• Superior prognostic value for preclinical organ damage and cardiovascular disease
• More widely available
• Improve patients’ compliance with antihypertensive drug therapy
• Improve hypertension control rates
• Potential for automated home blood pressure monitoring during nighttime sleep
• Cost-effectiveness
Advantages of home compared to ambulatory blood pressure
• More widely available
• Good acceptance and preferred by users
• Less discomfort and minimal restriction of daily activities and sleep
• Less costly
A. Ntineri et al.421
activities and particularly during sleep [11, 12]. Studies have shown that home BP 
monitoring can improve hypertension control rates by improving patients’ long- 
term compliance with antihypertensive drug treatment [13, 14]. These features, 
together with the wider availability and the lower cost of the method compared to 
office and ambulatory BP monitoring, render it the most cost-effective method for 
long-term BP monitoring [15, 16].
29.2.2  Disadvantages
An important limitation of home BP monitoring is the potential for reporting bias 
with over- or underreporting of home BP readings which is the “Achilles’ heel” of 
the method and might lead in over- or undertreatment, especially in high-risk hyper -
tensives or those with high BP variability (Table  29.2) [17]. This can be prevented 
by using devices with automated memory or PC link capacity or with home BP 
telemonitoring [17]. Another important concern is that home BP monitoring might 
induce anxiety and obsessive behavior in some patients. Careful training and medi-
cal supervision are required in order to obtain reliable BP measurements and feel 
comfortable with the process of home monitoring and make sensible use of it. It 
should be mentioned that even if home BP monitoring is carefully performed 
according to the current recommendations, it only provides seated BP readings only 
at home, not at work or during other usual activities, under standardized conditions 
and thus not representing the dynamic behavior of BP during usual daily challenges 
[1–5]. Ambulatory BP monitoring is regarded as advantageous compared to home 
BP monitoring because it allows the evaluation of BP during nighttime sleep, which 
is important particularly in patients with diabetes, kidney disease, or sleep apnea. 
However, some novel low-cost home BP monitors allow reliable nocturnal BP eval-
uation and the detection of non-dippers, which is comparable to ambulatory BP 
monitoring [18, 19].
Table 29.2 Disadvantages of home blood pressure compared to office measurements and ambu-
latory monitoring
•  Reporting bias of home measurements (avoidable with automated devices having memory or 
PC link capacity or home blood pressure tele-monitoring)
• Inability to monitor asleep blood pressure (possible with some novel home monitors)
• Measurements do not reflect usual daily activities
• Questionable accuracy of oscillometric devices in the presence of arrhythmias
• Devices often not properly validated for blood pressure measurement accuracy
• Potential to induce anxiety and excessive blood pressure monitoring
•  Some patients may self-modify their drug treatment on the basis of casual blood pressure 
readings
• Need for training (minimal with automated devices) and medical supervision29 Home Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension and Hypertension422
29.3  Clinical Indications
Ambulatory and home BP monitoring are regarded as indispensable tools adjunct 
to the classic office BP measurements for screening, diagnosis, and manage-
ment of hypertension. Although ambulatory BP monitoring remains the refer -
ence out-of-office BP monitoring method, in most cases the two methods might 
be considered interchangeable. Indeed, these methods should be regarded as 
complementary rather than competitive tools in the assessment of hyperten-
sive patients. When deciding which method to use, equipment availability and 
patients’ characteristics and preference should be taken into account. Home BP 
monitoring may be more suitable in the initial assessment of subjects with sus-
pected hypertension whereas home BP monitoring for the long-term follow-up 
of treated hypertensives.
The main clinical indications for home BP monitoring include (1) the suspicion 
of white-coat and (2) masked hypertension; (3) identification of white-coat reaction 
and masked hypertension effect in treated hypertensives; (4) considerable variabil-
ity of office BP over the same or different visits; (5) identification of true and false 
resistant hypertension; (6) autonomic, postural, postprandial, siesta- and drug- 
induced hypotension; and (7) elevated office BP or suspected preeclampsia in preg-
nant women [2, 3]. Thus, the major value of home BP monitoring is its usefulness 
in detecting the white-coat and masked hypertension phenomena, which remain 
undiagnosed and inadequately treated when considering using exclusively office BP 
measurements [2, 3]. White-coat hypertension is defined by normal home BP moni-
toring (<135/85  mmHg, systolic/diastolic) and elevated office BP values 
(≥140/90 mmHg), thus not truly reflecting the “true” BP of an individual. These 
subjects should not be considered as normotensives, as they present higher out-of- 
office BP than truly normotensives, frequently have dysmetabolic risk factors or 
asymptomatic organ damage, are more likely to develop progress to sustained 
hypertension within the next years, and, thus, carry intermediate cardiovascular risk 
between normotensives and hypertensives [20–22]. Factors that raise the possibility 
of white-coat hypertension are mildly elevated office BP, older age, female gender, 
and non-smoking habit [23]. In addition, high-normal office BP in low cardiovascu-
lar risk individuals without asymptomatic organ damage is a condition that white- 
coat hypertension is most likely and should be ruled out. On the other hand, masked 
hypertensives have elevated home BP (≥135/85  mmHg) but normal office BP 
(<140/90 mmHg) and present higher prevalence of preclinical target organ damage 
and increased cardiovascular risk, which is close to that of the sustained hyperten-
sives [22, 24, 25]. High-normal office BP and normal office BP in individuals with 
high cardiovascular risk or asymptomatic organ damage are considered as condi-
tions that might be associated with the presence of masked hypertension. Other 
predictors of the phenomenon are the male gender, younger (and older) age, smok-
ing habit, increased body mass index, occasional elevation of office BP, or the pres-
ence of concomitant disease (diabetes mellitus type 2, end-stage renal disease, 
cardiac hypertrophy, peripheral arterial disease, obstructive sleep apnea) [26–28]. 
The masked hypertension phenomenon is also frequent in treated hypertensives 
A. Ntineri et al.423
(masked uncontrolled hypertension). When the diagnosis of these phenomena is 
confirmed, treatment adjustment should be considered, particularly in subjects with 
high cardiovascular risk [2].
29.3.1  Home Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension
A considerable proportion of subjects in the general population assessed with dif-
ferent BP measurement methods (office, home, or ambulatory BP measurements) 
cluster close to the diagnostic BP thresholds of hypertension (differ less than 
5 mmHg) entailing diagnostic uncertainty and confusion. A study that investigated 
the level of agreement between ambulatory and home BP in the diagnosis of masked 
hypertension (Fig.  29.1) showed that, in subjects attending a hypertension clinic, 
when assessing participants with office BP measurements, there is a high proportion 
with high-normal office BP (possible masked hypertension) or stage 1 office hyper -
tension (possible white-coat hypertension) among both untreated and treated sub-
jects. All of them should undergo out-of-office BP evaluation in order to reveal the 
true BP phenotype. By combining office and out-of-office BP measurements, about 
2/3 of subjects with high-normal office BP will exhibit high-normal BP also in the 
home BP monitoring and confirm the diagnosis of prehypertension, yet the rest 1/3 
of them will be diagnosed with masked hypertension [29]. Similarly, all individuals 
with stage 1 office hypertension should be offered out-of-office BP monitoring in 
order to exclude the diagnosis of white-coat hypertension and avoid unnecessary 
treatment initiation or titration. It is important to note that even in these tricky cases 
Systolic BP
90110130150170190210
90 110 130 150 170 190 210
Office BP  (mmHg )Home BP  (mmHg)
Home BP  (mmHg)
Office BP  (mmHg)Diastolic BP
50658095110125
50 65 80 95 110 125r 0.69r 0.73
A CB D
A CB D
Fig. 29.1 Relationship of office with home blood pressure measurements and hypertension phe-
notypes (Group A, normotensives; B, hypertensives; C, subjects with white-coat phenomenon; D, 
subjects with masked hypertension phenomenon). Gray zone indicates high-normal office blood 
pressure and office hypertension stage 1 range, where masked and white-coat hypertension, 
respectively, are particularly common and out-of-office blood pressure monitoring is mandatory 
(Modified from [29]). BP blood pressure, r correlation coefficient29 Home Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension and Hypertension424
within the gray zones of uncertainty (BP close to the diagnostic threshold), home 
BP monitoring is regarded as having similar diagnostic value with ambulatory BP 
monitoring with the disagreement between them being rather uncommon and in 
most cases clinically irrelevant [29].
29.4  Clinical Value
29.4.1  Diagnostic Value
Several studies during the last decade have demonstrated the efficiency of home 
BP monitoring in the accurate diagnosis of hypertension. These studies investi-
gated the diagnostic performance of home BP monitoring by determining the sen-
sitivity, specificity, positive and negative diagnostic values, and diagnostic 
agreement by considering ambulatory BP monitoring as reference method [1 ]. 
Most of these studies have examined particular diagnostic phenotypes of hyper -
tension (sustained, white-coat, masked, or resistant) and included populations 
with different characteristics (untreated subjects, treated hypertensives, patients 
with type 2 diabetes, chronic kidney disease, children). The available data suggest 
considerable diagnostic agreement between the two methods ranging from about 
70 to 90%, with home BP monitoring being more efficient in identifying normo-
tensive individuals, yet less accurate in detecting truly hypertensives, as it was 
associated with high specificity and negative predictive value (>80%) but rela-
tively lower sensitivity and positive predictive value (60–70%) [30]. One of these 
studies examined the diagnostic accuracy of home BP monitoring separately in 
613 untreated and treated subjects and reported that the sensitivity for hyperten-
sion diagnosis varied between 48–100% in untreated subjects and 52–97% in 
treated subjects and specificity between 44–93% and 63–84%, respectively [31]. 
Another study in resistant hypertension also showed that home BP monitoring 
was a reliable alternative diagnostic method to ambulatory BP monitoring [32]. 
These conclusions are based on the assumption that ambulatory BP monitoring is 
perfectly reproducible and reliable, which certainly is not the case. Moreover, the 
diagnostic disagreement between the two methods in several cases was “arith-
metical” and clinically irrelevant (within 5 mmHg) and mostly present in subjects 
whose BP levels were close to the diagnostic thresholds and, therefore, is proba-
bly attributed, to a great extent, to the imperfect reproducibility of all BP measure-
ment methods [1 , 29].
29.4.2  Prognostic Value
29.4.2.1  Association with Preclinical Target Organ Damage
Preclinical target organ damage is recognized as an intermediate stage in the 
sequence of cardiovascular disease development, and its presence in asymptomatic 
hypertensive subjects indicates increased risk of future cardiovascular events [2]. 
A. Ntineri et al.425
Several cross-sectional studies have investigated the association of home BP moni-
toring with indices of preclinical target organ damage at the level of the heart, the 
large arteries, and the kidneys and showed superiority compared to the conventional 
office measurements and similar correlations as with ambulatory BP measurements. 
A meta-analysis compared the association of home vs. office and ambulatory BP 
monitoring with indices of organ damage, and the most extensively studied marker 
was echocardiographic left ventricular mass index [33]. Analysis of ten studies 
revealed stronger correlation coefficients for home vs. office BP (systolic/diastolic, 
pooled r = 0.46/0.28 vs. 0.23/0.19, respectively), whereas data from nine studies 
indicated similar coefficients for home and ambulatory BP monitoring [33]. There 
is weaker evidence for carotid intima-media thickness, pulse wave velocity, and 
urine protein excretion, with a consistent trend toward stronger coefficients for 
home than office BP, with the latter not reaching statistical significance [33]. 
Another meta-analysis showed that home BP is superior to office BP in determining 
proteinuria [34].
29.4.2.2  Prediction of Cardiovascular Outcome
Further to the abovementioned studies assessing surrogate endpoints, current guide-
lines for hypertension in adults are mainly based on large, long-term observational 
and interventional outcome studies with hard endpoints of cardiovascular morbidity 
and mortality [2, 35].
Two meta-analyses (Table  29.3) have investigated the evidence sourced from 
outcome trials in the general population, in primary care, and in hypertensive 
patients and assessed the prognostic ability of home compared to office BP mea-
surements [36, 37]. Both were based on data from 8 prospective studies and 17,688 
patients followed for 3.2–10.9 years, which resulted in the availability of informa-
tion based on almost 100,000 person/years of follow-up, and showed home to be 
superior to office BP measurements, with this difference being beyond chance for 
systolic BP [36, 37]. Moreover, in the meta-analysis by Ward et  al., home BP 
remained a significant predictor of cardiovascular mortality and cardiovascular 
events even after adjustment for office BP, suggesting its independent prognostic 
value over and beyond that of office BP [37]. However, one major limitation of the 
abovementioned meta-analyses was that these were based on aggregate data.
In 2014 the International Database of HOme BP in relation to Cardiovascular 
Outcome (IDHOCO) including individual participants’ data of five population 
Table 29.3 Meta-analyses of studies on prognostic value of home versus office blood pressure 
(random-effects estimates)
Systolic blood pressure Diastolic blood pressure
Home Office Home Office
Stergiou et al. [36] 1.15 (1.10–1.20) 1.07 (1.04–1.11) 1.12 (1.09–1.16) 1.08 (1.02–1.14)
Ward et al. [37] 1.14 (1.09–1.20) 1.10 (1.06–1.15) 1.13 (1.08–1.18) 1.07 (0.99–1.16)
Hazard ratios for cardiovascular events per 10 mmHg increase in systolic or 5 mmHg diastolic 
office and home blood pressure (adjusted hazard ratios with 95% confidence intervals in 
parentheses)29 Home Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension and Hypertension426
studies (n  =  5008, mean follow-up 8.3 years, 46,593 person-years) showed that 
home BP substantially refined risk stratification at office BP levels assumed to carry 
no or only mildly increased risk, in particular in the presence of masked hyperten-
sion [38]. More specifically, in participants with optimal or normal office BP, hazard 
ratios for a composite cardiovascular endpoint associated with a 10 mmHg higher 
systolic home BP were 1.28 and 1.22, respectively [38]. At high-normal office BP 
and in mild hypertension, the hazard ratios were at about 1.20 for all cardiovascular 
events and 1.30 for stroke [38]. In contrast, in severe hypertension, self-measured 
home BP did not improve the prediction of death or cardiovascular complications. 
A further analysis of the same dataset was performed separately in untreated and 
treated subjects [22]. Among untreated subjects, cardiovascular risk was higher in 
those with white-coat hypertension (adjusted hazard ratio 1.42), masked hyperten-
sion (1.55), and sustained hypertension (2.13) compared with normotensive sub-
jects [22]. Among treated patients, only masked uncontrolled hypertension but not 
white-coat hypertension assessed by home measurements was demonstrated as a 
cardiovascular risk factor, probably because the latter receives effective treatment 
on the basis of elevated office BP, whereas the former probably remains under -
treated because of low office BP.
Another important point is the prognostic information that is provided by home 
BP monitoring independently of that obtained from ambulatory BP monitoring. 
This was clearly demonstrated in two population outcome studies (PAMELA, 
Ohasama) where subjects with elevated ambulatory but low home BP or the reverse 
were at increased cardiovascular risk compared to normotensives (low home and 
ambulatory BP), rendering the two methods not fully interchangeable [39, 40].
29.4.3  Role in Treatment Adjustment
Home BP monitoring is very often used in clinical practice in decision-making for 
antihypertensive drug treatment initiation and titration. Because of its superior 
reproducibility, home BP can evaluate accurately the magnitude of the antihyper -
tensive drug action and can thereby identify treatment-induced changes in BP more 
reliably than the office measurements [9]. Moreover, morning home BP measured 
before drug intake reflects the trough BP lowering effect of antihypertensive drugs 
and evening home BP the plateau effect. Thus, the use of the morning/evening home 
BP ration provides similar information on the duration of antihypertensive drug 
effect though the 24 h period as the trough: peak ratio assessed by 24 h ambulatory 
BP monitoring [41].
Two studies investigated the association between treatment-induced changes in 
home, ambulatory, and office BP and treatment-induced changes in indices of pre-
clinical organ damage. In the Study on Ambulatory Monitoring of Blood Pressure 
and Lisinopril Evaluation (SAMPLE) in 206 hypertensives followed for 12 months, 
the treatment-induced regression in left ventricular hypertrophy was more closely 
associated with treatment-induced changes in ambulatory than in office or home 
BP [42]. However, only two home readings were obtained in this study, and, 
A. Ntineri et al.427
therefore, in that study the potential of home BP monitoring has not been exhausted. 
Another study in 116 hypertensives, with 13.4-month follow-up, showed that 
treatment- induced changes in both 24 h ambulatory and 7-day home BP monitor -
ing were more closely related than office BP measurements with treatment-induced 
changes in organ damage (left ventricular mass index, pulse wave velocity, albu-
minuria) [43]. Interestingly, there were differences between home and ambulatory 
BP monitoring in their associations with the changes in different indices of organ 
damage, which implies that these methods are complementary rather than inter -
changeable in monitoring the effects of antihypertensive treatment on target organ 
damage [43].
Nine randomized studies assessed treatment adjustment based on home com-
pared to office BP (seven studies) [44–50] or ambulatory BP monitoring (two stud-
ies) [51, 52]. These studies differed in their inclusion criteria, population 
characteristics, BP measurement methodology, BP goals, and duration of follow-up. 
Three of the studies used the same threshold for office and home BP, which is not in 
line with current guidelines and led to inferior BP control with home BP monitoring 
[45, 46, 48]. Four other studies showed larger BP decline with treatment adjustment 
based on home rather than office BP measurements [44, 47, 49, 50]. Two studies 
compared home vs. ambulatory BP for treatment adjustment. The first in 98 subjects 
followed for 6 months found no difference in BP control when using home or ambu-
latory BP monitoring [51]. The second one randomized 116 subjects to treatment 
initiation based either on home BP alone or on combined use of office BP and 
ambulatory BP monitoring [52]. After an average follow-up of 13.4 months, there 
was no difference between the two arms in BP decline and hypertension control 
assessed by home or ambulatory BP monitoring, and, more importantly, there was 
no difference in treatment-induced changes in several indices of preclinical target 
organ damage [52].
29.4.4  Role in Long-Term Follow-Up and Benefits
The long-term use of home BP monitoring by patients treated for hypertension is 
recommended by current guidelines. Home BP measurements have the unique 
advantage compared to office and ambulatory BP monitoring to enable hypertensive 
individuals to check their BP levels not only through a period of days but during 
weeks, months, and even years and at minimal cost. Thus, this method increases 
their awareness motivating for active participation in their follow-up in cooperation 
with the health-care provider.
Several randomized controlled trials have shown that treated hypertensives who 
perform home BP measurements have improved long-term adherence to drug ther -
apy and thereby higher hypertension control rates [14, 53]. In addition, home BP 
monitoring prevents them from adhering to therapy only before an office visit, a 
phenomenon known as “white-coat adherence,” which is associated with increased 
cardiovascular risk [2, 3]. A systematic review of 72 randomized controlled trials 
that evaluated the effectiveness of several interventions aiming to improve BP 29 Home Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension and Hypertension428
control (home BP monitoring, educational interventions, pharmacist- or nurse-led 
care, organizational interventions, appointment reminder systems) showed home 
BP monitoring to be the most efficient method [54]. The MONITOR study in treated 
uncontrolled hypertensives showed that a 2-month home BP monitoring protocol 
without medication titration led to superior ambulatory BP monitoring control than 
the usual care control group [55]. Another study in 1350 hypertensive patients 
attending a BP clinic showed that those using home BP measurements had higher 
BP control rates [56].
29.5  Nocturnal Home Blood Pressure
Nighttime ambulatory BP carries superior prognostic value in terms of cardiovas-
cular risk compared to daytime ambulatory, home, or office BP [57, 58]. Novel 
time- equipped home BP monitors allow automated BP monitoring during night-
time sleep and rendered nocturnal home BP monitoring a feasible method, alter -
native to ambulatory BP monitoring for the evaluation of nighttime BP and 
detection.
A recently published systematic review and meta-analysis identified a few 
studies providing comparative data between nighttime home and ambulatory BP 
monitoring regarding their differences as well as their association with indices of 
preclinical target organ damage [59]. Six studies, mainly including hyperten-
sives, reported similar and strongly correlated values for nighttime home and 
ambulatory BP [19, 60–64]. As shown in two studies, the two methods have close 
agreement (77.3%) in detecting non-dippers [19, 60]. Three studies reported data 
on the association of systolic nighttime home and ambulatory BP with left ven-
tricular mass index and two studies on their association with common carotid 
intima-media thickness with the pooled correlation coefficients being compara-
ble [59, 60, 63]. Two studies reported on the association of urinary albumin 
excretion with systolic nighttime home and nighttime ambulatory BP suggesting 
stronger relationship with the former [59, 60, 62]. In conclusion, preliminary 
data suggest that nighttime home BP seems to be at least as reliable as nighttime 
ambulatory BP monitoring in determining preclinical target organ damage. 
However, these data are cross-sectional, and outcome studies are needed to con-
firm the value of nighttime home BP in predicting cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality.
29.6  Cost-Effectiveness
Home BP monitoring has the potential for significant cost savings through the pre-
vention of unnecessary treatment in subjects with white-coat phenomenon, the 
lesser need for office visits, and the optimal treatment of masked hypertensives that 
is expected to reduce the incidence of cardiovascular complications [4, 30]. On the 
other hand, there are several costs, such as that for purchasing home BP devices 
A. Ntineri et al.429
which is usually covered by the patients themselves; the cost for the time required 
for patients’ training by the physicians or medical staff on the appropriate use of the 
method, which required for the necessary validation of devices; and also costs for 
the physician time for data interpretation and consultation to patients regarding 
changes in treatment [4, 30].
An old review showed that the estimated annualized resource cost of home BP 
monitoring was less than half of that of ambulatory BP monitoring [65]. A decision 
tree model based on data from the Ohasama home BP outcome study applied on a 
Japanese national database concluded that the introduction of home BP monitoring 
for the diagnosis and treatment of hypertension would be very effective to save costs 
[66, 67]. This was mainly attributed to avoidance of treatment of white-coat hyper -
tensives and improvement of prognosis due to better control of hypertension [66, 
67]. A recent study in 116 untreated hypertensive subjects who were randomized to 
use home or office/ambulatory BP monitoring for antihypertensive treatment initia-
tion and titration showed that the cost related to health resources utilized within 
12-month follow-up was lower in the home BP monitoring arm [16]. Interestingly, 
this difference in favor of home BP monitoring became more evident in a 5-year 
projection [16]. Another study performed a cost-benefit analysis from the perspec-
tive of the insurer by using a decision-analytic model that simulated the transitions 
among health states from initial physician visit to hypertension diagnosis, to treat-
ment, to hypertension-related cardiovascular diseases, and to patient death or resig-
nation from the plan [15]. This study concluded that reimbursement of home BP 
monitoring is cost beneficial from an insurer’s perspective for diagnosing and treat-
ing hypertension [15].
29.7  Clinical Application
29.7.1  Devices and Cuffs
Validated automated electronic upper-arm-cuff devices, especially those using an 
oscillometric algorithm, are currently recommended for home BP monitoring, as 
they are easy to use, relatively accurate, and devoid of the observer bias [3]. Aneroid 
or hybrid auscultatory devices might also be used but require skills, training, and 
more regular calibration, which often are not feasible in general practice. Wrist 
devices are regarded as less accurate than upper-arm devices, mainly because of 
anatomical differentiations of the wrist and of difficulty in following the correct 
wrist position (at heart level and relaxed) [3]. The accuracy of electronic BP moni-
tors should have been tested against conventional mercury sphygmomanometry 
according to established validation protocols [68–71]. The use of cuffs of appropri-
ate inflatable bladder size (length should cover 80–100% of the arm circumference, 
and the width should be about half of the length) is of major importance in order to 
avoid over- or underestimation of BP. The use of monitors with automated memory 
or PC link capacity is also recommended to prevent misreporting of self-BP read-
ings by patients (Table 29.4).29 Home Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension and Hypertension430
29.7.2  Conditions and Procedure
The patient should be seated, with the back supported, without crossing legs, in a 
quiet room at a comfortable temperature, and at least 5 min of rest should precede 
the measurement [3]. Talking during the measurement and coffee or smoking for at 
least 30 min before the measurement should be discouraged [3]. The cuff should be 
placed at heart level with the center of the bladder over the brachial artery [3]. In 
individuals without a consistent between-arm difference as checked in the office on 
repeated measurements, home BP measurements should be performed sequentially 
on the same, usually the non-dominant, arm [3].
29.7.3  Monitoring Schedule
For the initial evaluation of BP levels (untreated subjects) and before each visit to 
the physician (for treated hypertensives), a standard monitoring schedule which 
includes duplicate measurements (with 1 min interval) in the morning (before drug 
intake if treated), and the evening, for 7 routine work days (not less than 3 days) is 
recommended [3]. In any case, 12 home BP readings obtained as described above 
seem to be the minimum acceptable sample [3]. For the long-term follow-up of 
treated hypertensives, home BP measurements once or twice per week might seem 
to be appropriate to ensure maintenance of adequate BP control.
29.7.4  Diagnostic Threshold and Interpretation
Home BP readings of the first monitoring day should be better discarded, as they are 
typically higher and more variable than of the next days [3]. Based on evidence 
derived from meta-analyses, cross-sectional, and also long-term observational stud-
ies, the current guidelines recommend a hypertension threshold for average home Table 29.4 Recommendations for optimal application of home blood pressure monitoring
Devices and 
cuffsAutomated electronic (oscillometric) upper-arm devices validated according to 
an established protocol and equipped with automated memory (or PC link 
capacity) Cuff (bladder) size according to individual arm circumference
Conditions Measurements in a quiet room after 5 min sitting rest with back supported and 
arm resting at heart level
Monitoring 
scheduleMonitoring for 7 days before each office visit with duplicate (1 min intervals) 
morning (before drug intake) and evening measurements. Not fewer than 3 
days (12 readings)
Evaluation Calculation of average blood pressure of all readings after discarding the first 
day
Diagnostic 
thresholdsNormal home blood pressure, <130/80 mmHg; hypertension, ≥135/85 mmHg, 
intermediate levels are considered borderline
Long-term 
follow-up1–2 duplicate measurements per week
A. Ntineri et al.431
BP at 135/85 mmHg (the same as for awake ambulatory BP) [3, 4]. Levels exceed-
ing this threshold are considered elevated. Home BP levels ranging between 130–
135 mmHg for systolic and 80–85 mmHg for diastolic BP are regarded as borderline 
(prehypertension range) and those <130/80 mmHg as normal [3].
29.8  Summary
Increasing evidence suggests that self-home BP monitoring has primary role for 
most patients with hypertension in both the diagnosis and the long-term manage-
ment. Recent European guidelines recommend home BP monitoring for out-of- 
office BP evaluation in clinical practice to have similar clinical indications as 
ambulatory BP monitoring and the choice between them in each case to be depended 
on their availability and on patients’ special characteristics and preference. 
Particularly in untreated or treated individuals with office BP levels close to the 
diagnostic thresholds (prehypertension, office hypertension stage 1), home BP 
monitoring is mandatory for the optimal decision-making, as it allows the identifi-
cation of intermediate phenotypes of hypertension (white-coat and masked 
hypertension).
References
 1. Stergiou GS, Kollias A, Zeniodi M, Karpettas N, Ntineri A. Home blood pressure monitoring: 
primary role in hypertension management. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2014;16:462.
 2. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redon J, Zanchetti A, Bohm M, Christiaens T, Cifkova 
R, De Backer G, Dominiczak A, Galderisi M, Grobbee DE, Jaarsma T, Kirchhof P, Kjeldsen 
SE, Laurent S, Manolis AJ, Nilsson PM, Ruilope LM, Schmieder RE, Sirnes PA, Sleight P, 
Viigimaa M, Waeber B, Zannad F. 2013 ESH/ESC Guidelines for the management of arterial 
Hypertension: the Task Force for the Management of Arterial Hypertension of the European 
Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). J Hypertens. 
2013;31:1281–357.
 3. Parati G, Stergiou GS, Asmar R, Bilo G, de Leeuw P, Imai Y , Kario K, Lurbe E, Manolis A, 
Mengden T, O’Brien E, Ohkubo T, Padfield P, Palatini P, Pickering T, Redon J, Revera M, 
Ruilope LM, Shennan A, Staessen JA, Tisler A, Waeber B, Zanchetti A, Mancia G. European 
Society of Hypertension guidelines for blood pressure monitoring at home: a summary report 
of the second international consensus conference on home blood pressure monitoring. J 
Hypertens. 2008;26:1505–26.
 4. Pickering TG, Miller NH, Ogedegbe G, Krakoff LR, Artinian NT, Goff D.  Call to action 
on use and reimbursement for home blood pressure monitoring: a joint scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association, American Society Of Hypertension, and Preventive 
Cardiovascular Nurses Association. Hypertension. 2008;52:10–29.
 5. Stergiou GS, Kollias A. Home monitoring of blood Pressure. In: Bakris LG, Sorrentino MJ, 
editors. Hypertension: a companion to Braunwald’s heart disease. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: 
Elsevier; 2018. p. 89–95.
 6. Parati G, Stergiou GS. Self measured and ambulatory blood pressure in assessing the ‘white- 
coat’ phenomenon. J Hypertens. 2003;21:677–82.
 7. Vaur L, Dubroca II, Dutrey-Dupagne C, Genes N, Chatellier G, Bouvier-d’Yvoire M, Elkik 
F, Menard J. Superiority of home blood pressure measurements over office measurements for 
testing antihypertensive drugs. Blood Press Monit. 1998;3:107–14.29 Home Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension and Hypertension432
 8. Rose G. Standardisation of observers in blood-pressure measurement. Lancet. 1965;1:673–4.
 9. Stergiou GS, Baibas NM, Gantzarou AP, Skeva II, Kalkana CB, Roussias LG, Mountokalakis 
TD. Reproducibility of home, ambulatory, and clinic blood pressure: implications for the design 
of trials for the assessment of antihypertensive drug efficacy. Am J Hypertens. 2002;15:101–4.
 10. Stergiou GS, Ntineri A.  The optimal schedule for self-home blood pressure monitoring. J 
Hypertens. 2015;33:693–7.
 11. Little P, Barnett J, Barnsley L, Marjoram J, Fitzgerald-Barron A, Mant D.  Comparison of 
acceptability of and preferences for different methods of measuring blood pressure in primary 
care. BMJ. 2002;325:258–9.
 12. Nasothimiou EG, Karpettas N, Dafni MG, Stergiou GS. Patients’ preference for ambulatory 
versus home blood pressure monitoring. J Hum Hypertens. 2014;28:224–9.
 13. Cappuccio FP, Kerry SM, Forbes L, Donald A. Blood pressure control by home monitoring: 
meta-analysis of randomised trials. BMJ. 2004;329:145.
 14. Ogedegbe G, Schoenthaler A. A systematic review of the effects of home blood pressure moni-
toring on medication adherence. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2006;8:174–80.
 15. Arrieta A, Woods JR, Qiao N, Jay SJ. Cost-benefit analysis of home blood pressure monitoring 
in hypertension diagnosis and treatment: an insurer perspective. Hypertension. 2014;64:891–6.
 16. Boubouchairopoulou N, Karpettas N, Athanasakis K, Kollias A, Protogerou AD, Achimastos 
A, Stergiou GS. Cost estimation of hypertension management based on home blood pressure 
monitoring alone or combined office and ambulatory blood pressure measurements. J Am Soc 
Hypertens. 2014;8:732–8.
 17. Myers MG, Stergiou GS. Reporting bias: Achilles' heel of home blood pressure monitoring. J 
Am Soc Hypertens. 2014;8:350–7.
 18. Hosohata K, Kikuya M, Ohkubo T, Metoki H, Asayama K, Inoue R, Obara T, Hashimoto J, 
Totsune K, Hoshi H, Satoh H, Imai Y . Reproducibility of nocturnal blood pressure assessed by 
self-measurement of blood pressure at home. Hypertens Res. 2007;30:707–12.
 19. Stergiou GS, Nasothimiou EG, Destounis A, Poulidakis E, Evagelou I, Tzamouranis 
D. Assessment of the diurnal blood pressure profile and detection of non-dippers based on 
home or ambulatory monitoring. Am J Hypertens. 2012;25:974–8.
 20. Kollias A, Ntineri A, Stergiou GS. Is white-coat hypertension a harbinger of increased risk? 
Hypertens Res. 2014;37:791–5.
 21. Briasoulis A, Androulakis E, Palla M, Papageorgiou N, Tousoulis D. White-coat hypertension 
and cardiovascular events: a meta-analysis. J Hypertens. 2016;34:593–9.
 22. Stergiou GS, Asayama K, Thijs L, Kollias A, Niiranen TJ, Hozawa A, Boggia J, Johansson 
JK, Ohkubo T, Tsuji I, Jula AM, Imai Y , Staessen JA, International Database on HOme blood 
pressure in relation to Cardiovascular Outcome (IDHOCO) Investigators. Prognosis of white- 
coat and masked hypertension: International Database of HOme blood pressure in relation to 
Cardiovascular Outcome. Hypertension. 2014;63:675–82.
 23. Dolan E, Stanton A, Atkins N, Den Hond E, Thijs L, McCormack P, Staessen J, O’Brien 
E. Determinants of white-coat hypertension. Blood Press Monit. 2004;9:307–9.
 24. Cuspidi C, Sala C, Tadic M, Rescaldani M, Grassi G, Mancia G. Untreated masked hyperten-
sion and subclinical cardiac damage: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Hypertens. 
2015;28:806–13.
 25. Bobrie G, Chatellier G, Genes N, Clerson P, Vaur L, Vaisse B, Menard J, Mallion 
JM.  Cardiovascular prognosis of “masked hypertension” detected by blood pressure self- 
measurement in elderly treated hypertensive patients. JAMA. 2004;291:1342–9.
 26. Barochiner J, Cuffaro PE, Aparicio LS, Alfie J, Rada MA, Morales MS, Galarza CR, Waisman 
GD. Predictors of masked hypertension among treated hypertensive patients: an interesting 
association with orthostatic hypertension. Am J Hypertens. 2013;26:872–8.
 27. Hänninen MR, Niiranen TJ, Puukka PJ, Mattila AK, Jula AM. Determinants of masked hyper -
tension in the general population: the Finn-Home study. J Hypertens. 2011;29:1880–8.
 28. Sheppard JP, Fletcher B, Gill P, Martin U, Roberts N, McManus RJ. Predictors of the home- 
clinic blood pressure difference: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Hypertens. 
2016;29:614–25.
A. Ntineri et al.433
 29. Stergiou GS, Salgami EV , Tzamouranis DG, Roussias LG. Masked hypertension assessed by 
ambulatory blood pressure versus home blood pressure monitoring: is it the same phenom-
enon? Am J Hypertens. 2005;18:772–8.
 30. Stergiou GS, Bliziotis IA. Home blood pressure monitoring in the diagnosis and treatment of 
hypertension: a systematic review. Am J Hypertens. 2011;24:123–34.
 31. Nasothimiou EG, Tzamouranis D, Rarra V , Roussias LG, Stergiou GS. Diagnostic accuracy 
of home vs. ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in untreated and treated hypertension. 
Hypertens Res. 2012;35:750–5.
 32. Nasothimiou EG, Tzamouranis D, Roussias LG, Stergiou GS. Home versus ambulatory blood 
pressure monitoring in the diagnosis of clinic resistant and true resistant hypertension. J Hum 
Hypertens. 2012;26:696–700.
 33. Bliziotis IA, Destounis A, Stergiou GS. Home versus ambulatory and office blood pressure 
in predicting target organ damage in hypertension: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Hypertens. 2012;30:1289–99.
 34. Fuchs SC, Mello RG, Fuchs FC. Home blood pressure monitoring is better predictor of cardio-
vascular disease and target organ damage than office blood pressure: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2013;15:413.
 35. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, Peto R, Collins R. Age-specific relevance of usual blood 
pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 
prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360:1903–13.
 36. Stergiou GS, Siontis KC, Ioannidis JP.  Home blood pressure as a cardiovascular outcome 
predictor: it’s time to take this method seriously. Hypertension. 2010;55:1301–3.
 37. Ward AM, Takahashi O, Stevens R, Heneghan C.  Home measurement of blood pressure 
and cardiovascular disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. J 
Hypertens. 2012;30:449–56.
 38. Asayama K, Thijs L, Brguljan-Hitij J, Niiranen TJ, Hozawa A, Boggia J, Aparicio LS, Hara 
A, Johansson JK, Ohkubo T, Tzourio C, Stergiou GS, Sandoya E, Tsuji I, Jula AM, Imai Y , 
Staessen JA, International Database of Home Blood Pressure in Relation to Cardiovascular 
Outcome (IDHOCO) investigators. Risk stratification by self-measured home blood pressure 
across categories of conventional blood pressure: a participant-level meta-analysis. PLoS Med. 
2014;e1001591:11.
 39. Mancia G, Facchetti R, Bombelli M, Grassi G, Sega R. Long-term risk of mortality associ-
ated with selective and combined elevation in office, home, and ambulatory blood pressure. 
Hypertension. 2006;47:846–53.
 40. Satoh M, Asayama K, Kikuya M, Inoue R, Metoki H, Hosaka M, Tsubota-Utsugi M, Obara T, 
Ishiguro A, Murakami K, Matsuda A, Yasui D, Murakami T, Mano N, Imai Y , Ohkubo T. Long- 
term stroke risk due to partial white-coat or masked hypertension based on home and ambula-
tory blood pressure measurements: The Ohasama Study. Hypertension. 2016;67:48–55.
 41. Stergiou GS, Efstathiou SP, Skeva II, Baibas NM, Roussias LG, Mountokalakis TD. Comparison 
of the smoothness index, the trough: peak ratio and the morning: evening ratio in assessing the 
features of the antihypertensive drug effect. J Hypertens. 2003;21:913–20.
 42. Mancia G, Zanchetti A, Agabiti-Rosei E, Benemio G, De Cesaris R, Fogari R, Pessina A, 
Porcellati C, Rappelli A, Salvetti A, Trimarco B. Ambulatory blood pressure is superior to 
clinic blood pressure in predicting treatment-induced regression of left ventricular hyper -
trophy. SAMPLE Study Group. Study on Ambulatory Monitoring of Blood Pressure and 
Lisinopril Evaluation. Circulation. 1997;95:1464–70.
 43. Karpettas N, Destounis A, Kollias A, Nasothimiou E, Moyssakis I, Stergiou GS. Prediction of 
treatment-induced changes in target-organ damage using changes in clinic, home and ambula-
tory blood pressure. Hypertens Res. 2014;37:543–7.
 44. Zarnke KB, Feagan BG, Mahon JL, Feldman RD. A randomized study comparing a patient- 
directed hypertension management strategy with usual office-based care. Am J Hypertens. 
1997;10:58–67.
 45. Broege PA, James GD, Pickering TG. Management of hypertension in the elderly using home 
blood pressures. Blood Press Monit. 2001;6:139–44.29 Home Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension and Hypertension434
 46. Staessen JA, Den Hond E, Celis H, Fagard R, Keary L, Vandenhoven G, O’Brien ET, 
Treatment of Hypertension Based on Home or Office Blood Pressure (THOP) Trial 
Investigators. Treatment of Hypertension Based on Home or Office Blood Pressure (THOP) 
Trial Investigators. Antihypertensive treatment based on blood pressure measurement at home 
or in the physician’s office: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;291:955–64.
 47. Halme L, Vesalainen R, Kaaja M, Kantola I, HOme MEasuRement of blood pressure study 
group. Self-monitoring of blood pressure promotes achievement of blood pressure target in 
primary health care. Am J Hypertens. 2005;18:1415–20.
 48. Verberk WJ, Kroon AA, Lenders JW, Kessels AG, van Montfrans GA, Smit AJ, van der Kuy PH, 
Nelemans PJ, Rennenberg RJ, Grobbee DE, Beltman FW, Joore MA, Brunenberg DE, Dirksen 
C, Thien T, de Leeuw PW, Home Versus Office Measurement, Reduction of Unnecessary 
Treatment Study Investigators. Home versus office measurement, reduction of unnecessary 
treatment study investigators. Self-measurement of blood pressure at home reduces the need 
for antihypertensive drugs: a randomized, controlled trial. Hypertension. 2007;50:1019–25.
 49. Tobe SW, Hunter K, Geerts R, Raymond N, Pylypchuk G, Canadian Hypertension Society. 
IMPPACT: Investigation of Medical Professionals and Patients Achieving Control Together. 
Can J Cardiol. 2008;24:205–8.
 50. McManus RJ, Mant J, Bray EP, Holder R, Jones MI, Greenfield S, Kaambwa B, Banting M, 
Bryan S, Little P, Williams B, Hobbs FD. Telemonitoring and self-management in the control 
of hypertension (TASMINH2): a randomized controlled trial. Lancet. 2010;376:163–72.
 51. Niiranen TJ, Kantola IM, Vesalainen R, Johansson J, Ruuska MJ. A comparison of home mea-
surement and ambulatory monitoring of blood pressure in the adjustment of antihypertensive 
treatment. Am J Hypertens. 2006;19:468–74.
 52. Stergiou GS, Karpettas N, Destounis A, Tzamouranis D, Nasothimiou E, Kollias A, Roussias 
L, Moyssakis I. Home blood pressure monitoring alone vs. combined clinic and ambulatory 
measurements in following treatment-induced changes in blood pressure and organ damage. 
Am J Hypertens. 2014;27:184–92.
 53. Agarwal R, Bills JE, Hecht TJ, Light RP. Role of home blood pressure monitoring in overcom-
ing therapeutic inertia and improving hypertension control: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Hypertension. 2011;57:29–38.
 54. Glynn LG, Murphy AW, Smith SM, Schroeder K, Fahey T. Self-monitoring and other non- 
pharmacological interventions to improve the management of hypertension in primary care: a 
systematic review. Br J Gen Pract. 2010;60:e476–88.
 55. Fuchs SC, Ferreira-da-Silva AL, Moreira LB, Neyeloff JL, Fuchs FC, Gus M, Wiehe M, 
Fuchs FD. Efficacy of isolated home blood pressure monitoring for blood pressure control: 
randomized controlled trial with ambulatory blood pressure monitoring – MONITOR study. J 
Hypertens. 2012;30:75–80.
 56. Cuspidi C, Meani S, Fusi V , Salerno M, Valerio C, Severgnini B, Catini E, Leonetti G, Magrini 
F, Zanchetti A. Home blood pressure measurement and its relationship with blood pressure 
control in a large selected hypertensive population. J Hum Hypertens. 2004;18:725–31.
 57. O’Brien E, Parati G, Stergiou G, Asmar R, Beilin L, Bilo G, Clement D, de la Sierra A, de 
Leeuw P, Dolan E, Fagard R, Graves J, Head GA, Imai Y , Kario K, Lurbe E, Mallion JM, 
Mancia G, Mengden T, Myers M, Ogedegbe G, Ohkubo T, Omboni S, Palatini P, Redon J, 
Ruilope LM, Shennan A, Staessen JA, vanMontfrans G, Verdecchia P, Waeber B, Wang J, 
Zanchetti A, Zhang Y . European Society of Hypertension position paper on ambulatory blood 
pressure monitoring. J Hypertens. 2013;31:1731–68.
 58. Hansen TW, Li Y , Boggia J, Thijs L, Richart T, Staessen JA. Predictive role of the nighttime 
blood pressure. Hypertension. 2011;57:3–10.
 59. Kollias A, Ntineri A, Stergiou GS. Association of night-time home blood pressure with night- 
time ambulatory blood pressure and target-organ damage: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. J Hypertens. 2017;35:442–52.
 60. Andreadis EA, Agaliotis G, Kollias A, Kolyvas G, Achimastos A, Stergiou GS. Night-time 
home versus ambulatory blood pressure in determining target organ damage. J Hypertens. 
2016;34:438–44; discussion 444.
A. Ntineri et al.435
 61. Ushio H, Ishigami T, Araki N, Minegishi S, Tamura K, Okano Y , Uchino K, Tochikubo O, 
Umemura S. Utility and feasibility of a new programmable home blood pressure monitoring 
device for the assessment of nighttime blood pressure. Clin Exp Nephrol. 2009;13(5):480.
 62. Ishikawa J, Hoshide S, Eguchi K, Ishikawa S, Shimada K, Kario K, Japan Morning Surge- 
Home Blood Pressure Study Investigators Group. Nighttime home blood pressure and the risk 
of hypertensive target organ damage. Hypertension. 2012;60:921–8.
 63. Lindroos AS, Johansson JK, Puukka PJ, Kantola I, Salomaa V , Juhanoja EP, Sivén SS, Jousilahti 
P, Jula AM, Niiranen TJ. The association between home versus ambulatory night-time blood pres-
sure and end-organ damage in the general population. J Hypertens. 2016;34:1730–7.
 64. Ishikawa J, Shimizu M, Sugiyama Edison E, Yano Y , Hoshide S, Eguchi K, Kario K, J-TOP 
(Japan Morning Surge-Target Organ Protection) Study Investigators Group. Assessment of the 
reductions in night-time blood pressure and dipping induced by antihypertensive medication 
using a home blood pressure monitor. J Hypertens. 2014;32:82–9.
 65. Appel LJ, Stason WB.  Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring and blood pressure self- 
measurement in the diagnosis and management of hypertension. Ann Intern Med. 
1993;118:867–82.
 66. Funahashi J, Ohkubo T, Fukunaga H, Kikuya M, Takada N, Asayama K, Metoki H, Obara T, 
Inoue R, Hashimoto J, Totsune K, Kobayashi M, Imai Y . The economic impact of the introduc-
tion of home blood pressure measurement for the diagnosis and treatment of hypertension. 
Blood Press Monit. 2006;11:257–67.
 67. Fukunaga H, Ohkubo T, Kobayashi M, Tamaki Y , Kikuya M, Obara T, Nakagawa M, Hara 
A, Asayama K, Metoki H, Inoue R, Hashimoto J, Totsune K, Imai Y . Cost-effectiveness of 
the introduction of home blood pressure measurement in patients with office hypertension. J 
Hypertens. 2008;26:685–90.
 68. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. American National Standard. 
Electronic or automated sphygmomanometers ANSI/AAMI SP10-1987. 3330 Washington 
Boulevard, Suite 400, Arlington, V A 22201-4598. USA: AAMI; 1987.
 69. O'Brien E, Petrie J, Littler W, de Swiet M, Padfield PL, O'Malley K, Jamieson M, Altman D, 
Bland M, Atkins N. The British Hypertension Society Protocol for the evaluation of automated 
and semi-automated blood pressure measuring devices with special reference to ambulatory 
systems. J Hypertens. 1990;8:607–19.
 70. O’Brien E, Pickering T, Asmar R, Myers M, Parati G, Staessen J, Mengden T, Imai Y , Waeber 
B, Palatini P, Gerin W, Working Group on Blood Pressure Monitoring of the European Society 
of Hypertension. Working Group on Blood Pressure Monitoring of the European Society of 
Hypertension International Protocol for validation of blood pressure measuring devices in 
adults. Blood Press Monit. 2002;7:3–17.
 71. O’Brien E, Atkins N, Stergiou G, Karpettas N, Parati G, Asmar R, Imai Y , Wang J, Mengden 
T, Shennan A. European Society of Hypertension International Protocol revision 2010 for the 
validation of blood pressure measuring devices in adults. Blood Press Monit. 2010;15:23–38.29 Home Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension and Hypertension437 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_30
Morning Surge of Blood Pressure 
in Prehypertension and Hypertension
Uday M. Jadhav and Onkar C. Swami
30.1  Introduction
Cardiovascular (CV) disease is an important cause of morbidity and mortality 
worldwide. It has been long accepted that hypertension is a key risk factor for CV 
disease [1]. The management of hypertension and associated adverse CV outcomes 
has always been at the forefront of prevention-based strategy [2]. Absolute blood 
pressure (BP) values are considered as an important determinant of adverse CV 
outcomes; however, these outcomes may depend on increased BP variability [3].
Morning blood pressure surge (MBPS) is a part of diurnal BP variability [4]. 
Recent studies have reported that an exaggerated MBPS is a CV risk in both the 
normotensive and hypertensive subjects. MBPS is linked with target organ damage 
and subsequently increased CV risk in patients with hypertension [5–7]. With every 
10  mm Hg increase in the early-morning systolic BP surge, the risk of stroke 
increases by 22% [8]. Incidence of ischemic stroke is four times higher in the morn-
ing period. Similarly, the risk of sudden cardiac death is 70% higher between 7 and 
9 AM compared to other times of the day. There is 2.5-fold greater risk of sudden 
cardiac death at 11 AM in an hour-by-hour analysis [9].
The clinical relevance and prognostic implications of MBPS can vary substan-
tially based on the method and time interval of assessment. There are many defini-
tions and different pathophysiological mechanisms proposed for MBPS [3]. An 
improved understanding of this phenomenon is required. In this chapter, we assessed 
the recently available data on MBPS with special emphasis on its definition, etiol-
ogy, clinical outcomes, diagnostic evaluation, and treatment strategy.
U. M. Jadhav ( *) 
Cardiology Department, MGM New Bombay Hospital, New Mumbai, India 
O. C. Swami 
Pune, India30438
30.2  Definition of Morning BP Surge
Presently there is a discrepancy on the definition of MBPS [10]. There are several 
definitions of MBPS (Table  30.1) [8, 11]. Two main definitions of the morning surge 
in BP are illustrated in the literature. One is “sleep-through morning surge,” and the 
second is “pre-waking morning surge” [4, 12]. Kario K et al. first defined sleep-
through and pre-waking morning surge and evaluated the association between 
excess MBPS and the risk of cerebrovascular diseases [13]. Stergiou GS et  al. 
assessed the reliability of different definitions of MBPS; they anticipated the differ -
ence between BP readings 2 h after rising and the average of all readings during 
sleep as the most reliable approach for assessing the MBPS [14].
30.3  Mechanisms of Morning BP Surge
An increase in BP after waking is a physiological phenomenon; however, a marked 
and rapid MBPS is associated with increased CV risk [12]. The pathophysiology of 
the morning surge in BP is unspecified. Insight in underlying mechanisms of morn-
ing surge, particularly in patients with hypertension, will be helpful in detecting 
new therapeutic strategies [10].
Elevated MBPS is believed to be associated with small and large arterial diseases 
[15]. There is a curvilinear association between contraction of the resistance arteries 
and vascular resistance, which explicates the acceleration of hypertension (Fig.  30.1) 
[16, 17]. The difference in vascular resistance between small arteries with and with-
out remodeling is augmented in the morning when the vascular tone is increased as 
compared to sleep [18].Table 30.1 MBPS definitions
Morning BP 
surge description Definition
Sleep-through 
surgeDifference between morning BP (average of 2 h of readings after wake-up) 
and the lowest night-time reading (average of the lowest night-time reading 
and the two adjacent readings before and after)
Pre-waking surge Difference between morning BP (average of 2 h of readings after wake-up) 
and the pre-awake BP (average of 2 h of readings before wake-up)
Rising surge Difference between BP on rising (single reading after wake-up) and BP 
before wake-up (single reading before wake-up)
Morning 
night-time 
differenceDifference between two morning BP readings (after 7 am) and the average 
night-time BP
Morning BP Average morning BP for 2 h after wake-up
Morning-evening 
differenceDifference between morning BP (average of self-monitored BP readings 
taken in the morning) and evening BP (average of self-monitored BP 
readings taken in the evening)
Note: Data adapted from a previous study [11]. MBPS morning blood pressure surge, BP blood 
pressure
U. M. Jadhav and O. C. Swami439
There is activation of the sympathetic nervous system and the renin-angiotensin 
system early in the morning [4]. The augmented activity of sympathetic nervous 
system and the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) may be possible mechanisms to 
increase in vascular resistance and the morning BP surge [12]. Predominantly, an 
activity of α-adrenergic component is increased [17], which increases the vascular 
tone of the small resistance arteries and may contribute to MBPS.  Additionally, 
plasma renin activity, angiotensin II, and aldosterone levels are increased before 
awakening [19]. There are several factors which possibly influences the morning 
surge in BP (Table 30.2) [20, 21].
Alpha-adrenergic vasoconstrictor response of small resistance vessels and pro-
gressive remodeling of the small vessels are predominant determinants of the rise in 
BP on awakening. Various risk factors for morning hypertension consist of older 
age, excessive alcohol intake, tobacco consumption, longer sleep, and later awaken-
ing times. Amplified arousal response of BP is the possible reason for the rise in BP 
immediately after wake up and is commonly noted in elderly with hypertension, Small ar tery with remodeling
and endothelial dysfunction
Vascular
resistance
SleepMorningNormal small ar tery
Medi a
Lumen
% ContractionRatio of
media thic kness to
lumen diameterM/L rati o
Functional
contractio n
Fig. 30.1 Mechanism of elevated morning blood pressure surge in patients with small artery 
disease. Note: Data reproduced from a previous study [16]
Table 30.2 Factors influencing the morning surge in BP
Increase in sympathetic activity Increase in aortic stiffness
Increase in renin-angiotensin system activity Microvascular dysfunction
Decrease in baroreflex sensitivity Heavy drinking
Endothelial dysfunction Smoking
Circadian rhythm Sleep apnea
Increase in platelet aggregation Insufficient efficacy of antihypertensive drugs
Oxidative stress Sodium/caffeine ingestion
Plasma cortisol Age (>70 years), Monday/winter
Note: Data adapted from previous study [20, 21]. BP blood pressure30 Morning Surge of Blood Pressure in Prehypertension and Hypertension440
whereas the morning surge beginning gradually during sleep is more common in 
younger individuals with hypertension [10].
The link between MBPS, short-term BP variability, and arterial stiffness in 
untreated patients with hypertension has been evaluated by Pucci G et al. Sleep-
through MBPS was found to be directly related to aortic stiffness, mediated by an 
increased average real variability of 24 h SBP. Adverse effects of MBPS may be 
partly explained by its association with arterial stiffness, mediated by short-term 
SBP variability [22].
Patients with hypertension are more prone for morning surge in BP as compared 
to normotensives. Head GA et al. investigated 24 h recordings by a new logistic 
curve method, which exposed distinct asymmetric circadian patterns of cardiovas-
cular changes in normotensive and hypertensive subjects. The method detected a 
30–40% greater rate of increase in BP in the hypertensive subjects [23].
30.4  Morning BP Surge and CV Outcomes
Morning is considered as the peak time for a range of adverse CV events. There is 
mounting evidence suggesting significant associations between MBPS and cardiac, 
cerebral, renal, and vascular damage (Fig.  30.2) [18]. Jaewon Oh et  al. recently 
evaluated an association of morning hypertension subtype (with nocturnal hyper -
tension) by means of vascular target organ damage and central hemodynamics in 
patients with high CV risk. Increased arterial stiffness and high central BP were 
prominently detected [5]. Association of MBPS with adverse CV outcomes may be 
due to the hemodynamic effects of the high BP on the arterial wall and the associ-
ated neurohumoral activation [10]. MBPS is associated with left ventricular 
Cardiac h ypertroph y
Diastolic dysfunction
Myocardial ischemia
Increased QTc dispersion and duration
Coronar y artery diseaseSilent cerebral inf arction
Strok e (Ischemic and hemorrhagic)
Morning BP Surge
Albuminu ria
Renal v ascular resistanceIncreased platelet aggregation
Micro vascular dysfunction
Increased carotid intima-media thic kness
Vascular stiffness
Vascular inflammation
Fig. 30.2 Associations between morning blood pressure surge and cardiovascular diseases. Note: 
Data adapted from a previous study [18]. BP blood pressure
U. M. Jadhav and O. C. Swami441
hypertrophy, carotid atherosclerosis, arterial stiffness, albuminuria, and silent cere-
brovascular disease [17].
The clinical implication of MBPS as a risk for triggering CV events is increased in 
patients with the advanced vascular disease. Kario K et al. recently proposed the con-
cept of a vicious cycle between hemodynamic stress and vascular disease that dam-
ages organs and plays a role in CV events such as systemic hemodynamic 
atherothrombotic syndrome (SHATS) [ 24]. In the following section, some of the CV 
outcomes of exaggerated MBPS in hypertension and prehypertension are elucidated.
Vascular disease and inflammation: MBPS is linked with carotid atherosclerosis 
in untreated patients with hypertension [25–27]. Plaque instability can be induced 
due to its association with increased vascular inflammation. Newly diagnosed and 
never-treated patients with higher sleep-through MBPS have higher carotid intima-
media thickness as reported in a study involving compromising untreated middle-
aged 241 patients with hypertension [28]. Alpaydin S et al. evaluated the association 
between the rate of BP variation and carotid intima-media thickness in patients with 
prehypertension and demonstrated an independent association of elevated MBPS 
with carotid intima-media thickness in such patients [29].
Hypertensive heart disease: Published evidence reported that an elevated MBPS 
is associated with hypertensive heart disease. MBPS augments cardiac afterload and 
arterial stiffness, contributing to left ventricular hypertrophy [18].
Stroke: Kario K et al. first reported that patients in the high sleep-through morn-
ing surge group have a high stroke incidence [8]. Silent cerebral infarction (SCI) is 
the strongest surrogate marker of clinical stroke, particularly in those with increased 
C-reactive protein levels [30]. Increased risk of SCI was observed in the morning 
surge group in elderly hypertensives [8]. The association between elevated MBPS 
and SCI is slightly influenced by low-grade inflammation [31]. Morning hyperten-
sion is an important risk for stroke in the Asian population [32].
Chronic kidney disease: Positive association between MBPS and renal disease 
has been reported [33, 34]. Elevated MBPS is associated with deterioration of kid-
ney function and development of chronic kidney disease (CKD). Turak O et  al. 
investigated the association between elevated MBPS and the development of inci-
dent CKD in 622 patients with essential hypertension. Patients underwent ambula-
tory BP measurements and were followed for a median of 3.33 years. During 
follow-up, 32 patients developed CKD. Higher MBPS was associated with incident 
CKD in all models [35].
CV mortality: Morning BP surge was associated with mortality in a study of 632 
hypertensive patients by Amodeo C et al. Patients with MBPS of 41 mm Hg were 
associated with a higher risk for mortality [36].
All-cause mortality: Xie JC et al. evaluated the predictive value of MBPS for 
future CV events, stroke, and all-cause mortality. Excess sleep-through surge found 
to be a strong predictor of mortality. Individuals for future all-cause with higher pre-
waking surge showed a tendency for increased risk of CV outcomes, but the differ -
ences were insignificant [13].
Morning BP surge, an indicator of prehypertension: An exaggerated morning 
rise in BP may be one of the indicators of a prehypertensive status with advanced 30 Morning Surge of Blood Pressure in Prehypertension and Hypertension442
small artery remodeling. Various pathophysiological factors affect arterial wall 
structure and endothelial function which may lead to prehypertension followed by 
hypertension and cardiovascular disease. Reported evidence suggests the significant 
association between a morning BP surge and small artery remodeling which would 
begin even in case of normotension [37].
Stress hypertension, orthostatic hypertension, ambulatory BP surge, sleep apnea-
related midnight surge, etc. are few of the surges other than morning BP surge 
reported to be a risk for developing cardiovascular disease. These BP surges may 
partly be related to each other on the basis of sympathetic hyperactivity and can be 
considered as indicative of a prehypertensive status [37].
30.5  Diagnostic Evaluation of MBPS
Evidence from ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM) or home BP monitoring 
(HBPM) studies has pointed out that MBPS is more closely associated with the CV 
risk [38].
Home BP monitoring was the best predictor of stroke event in a nationwide 
Japan Morning Surge-Home BP (JHOP) Study [39]. The Ohasama Study and 
FinHome Study in Finland reported that day-by-day variability of blood pressures 
based on home blood pressure has a prognostic significance for CVD [40]. 
Intermittent BP measurement at fixed intervals would undervalue the CV risk of 
MBPS. Ideally, beat-by-beat continuous BP monitoring is the best means of assess-
ing BP variability. Kario K developed a new hypoxia-triggered home nocturnal BP 
monitoring system, in which severe desaturation continuously monitored by pulse 
oximetry sends the signal of BP measurement to the device [41].
Common approach to evaluate the morning increase in blood pressure has been 
to synchronize records relative to the time of waking [42]. The morning BP-guided 
approach using HBPM is the first step toward perfect 24 h BP control [12]. Head 
GA and Lukoshkova EV described a novel method for determining the individual 
changes using a double logistic equation fitted to the individual pattern of blood 
pressure change [9].
30.6  Antihypertensive Strategy Targeting MBPS
Morning BP could be an important target of antihypertensive treatment [43]. Control 
of morning hypertension can be regarded as the first step to strict 24 h BP control 
[44]. Suppression of elevated MBPS, strict BP control of ˂130/80 mm Hg for 24 h, 
and adequate circadian rhythm (dipper type; 10–20% of nocturnal BP fall) are key 
components of perfect 24 h BP control [45]. Asians show greater MBPS [39]; it is 
particularly important to control morning BP as the first step toward achieving per -
fect 24 h BP control [38].
Till recently, there has been a difference of opinion on specific treatments for 
early-morning hypertension [ 46]. More definite treatment for MBPS may be 
U. M. Jadhav and O. C. Swami443
achieved using antihypertensive drugs that reduce the pressor effect of the neuro-
humoral factors, which is potentiated in the morning, such as inhibitors of sympa-
thetic activity [ 47]. Conceptually, specific treatments could include inhibition of 
the sympathetic nervous system and the RAS [ 46]. A chronotherapeutic approach, 
such as bedtime dosing and a drug delivery system that incorporates extended-
release or delayed-onset antihypertensive agents, is useful for reducing MBPS 
[20, 46].
Selection of antihypertensive drugs including a specific class (e.g., sympatholyt-
ics or RAS inhibitors) and timing of doses are important factors. Bedtime dosing of 
the antihypertensive drug, especially calcium channel blocker, alpha blocker, and 
RAS inhibitors, may suppress exaggerated MBPS without excessive nocturnal 
hypotension during sleep. Persistent reduction in sleep BP results in the reduction 
in nocturnal hypertension type of MBPS [47].
The MAPEC (Ambulatory BP Monitoring for Prediction of Cardiovascular 
Events) study showed that bedtime chronotherapy with ≥1 antihypertensives 
exerted better BP control and CVD risk reduction than conventional therapy. In this 
study, participants taking bedtime administration of at least one medication had 
significantly lower incidence of CV events (Fig.  30.3) [48]. Participating physicians 
were given the choice of prescribing, at least one medication of the recommended 
therapeutic classes, (angiotensin receptor blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitors, calcium channel blockers, β-blockers) during the study [48].
Alpha-adrenergic blockade at bedtime may be an effective means to reduce the 
morning BP rise in patients with uncontrolled morning hypertension [49]. RAS-
blocking agents that maintain pharmacodynamic effects into the early-morning 
period may be of help in individuals with the exaggerated rise in morning BP [50]. 
1.0
1.81.9
1.7
0All medications on aw akening
≥1 medications at bedtime
2Log-rank = 54.0;  p<0.001
4
Duration of follow-up (yrs)No. at ri sk
1084
1072928
955676
707478
558Awakening
Bedtime68Probability of event-free survivalFig. 30.3 Kaplan-Meier 
survival curves for subjects 
ingesting either all their 
medications upon 
awakening or ≥1 
medications at bedtime. 
Note: Data reproduced 
from a previous study [48]30 Morning Surge of Blood Pressure in Prehypertension and Hypertension444
Jadhav UM et al. evaluated the comparative efficacy of angiotensin receptor block-
ers on MBPS in hypertension. Olmesartan and telmisartan showed the beneficial 
and similar effect on the MBPS measured by different parameters on the 24  h 
ABPM (Fig. 30.4) [51].
Lifestyle modifications, such as better night-time sleep and moderation in alco-
hol intake, are the important part of the essential approach to suppress MBPS along 
with long-acting antihypertensive drugs, such as long-acting calcium channel block-
ers or inhibitors of the RAS [20]. Renal denervation is also an effective therapy for 
reducing morning surge of BP [47].
Morning BP guided approach by using home BP monitoring is the most promis-
ing step for effective antihypertensive treatment [12]. Kario K has suggested a strat-
egy for the morning BP  guided management of hypertension using home BP 
monitoring with three steps; first achieve the level of morning systolic BP as 
<145 mm Hg, then the morning systolic BP level of 135 mm Hg should be attained, 
and finally about 125 mm Hg or less should be achieved and maintained [45].
Therapeutic approaches to be considered: Reported evidence shown that long-
acting antihypertensive medications have advantages in controlling BP over 24 h in 
contrast to short-acting or intermediate-acting drugs. Hypertension guidelines have 
suggested the use of full dose or maximum dose of antihypertensive drugs, regard-
less of combination or monotherapy. Combination therapy of an angiotensin recep-
tor blocker or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and a calcium channel Sleep trough Surge - Telmisartan-10-10.0
50.00510152025303540
10.0 20.0Systolic Blood Pressure
30.0 40.0Sleep trough Surge - Olmesartan
Fig. 30.4 Sleep-through surge with olmesartan and telmisartan. Note: Data reproduced from a 
previous study [51]
U. M. Jadhav and O. C. Swami445
blocker or diuretic may improve 24 h BP control, especially during the trough effect 
morning hours. Therapeutic use of antihypertensive drugs of specific mechanisms 
can be one of the preferable targeted approaches (Table 30.3) [60].
CV benefits from the suppression of an exaggerated MBPS are still to be well 
established. Interventional studies to examine whether or not a reduction in MBPS, 
with pharmacologic or nonpharmacologic therapy, can lead to an improvement of Table 30.3 Summary of some important studies on therapeutic approaches for the treatment of 
elevated MBPS in hypertension
Study, design, 
sample size Study medication (mg/day) Study conclusion
Long-acting vs. short-acting antihypertensives
Ferrucci et al. 
[52], 
crossover, 40Amlodipine vs. nifedipine Amlodipine had greater antihypertensive 
efficacy vs. nifedipine
White et al. 
[53], parallel 
group, 490Telmisartan vs. valsartan Telmisartan achieved greater 
antihypertensive effect vs. valsartan during 
the early-morning period
Full dose vs. low dose of antihypertensive drugs
Bilo et al. [54], 
parallel group, 
626Amlodipine 5 vs. olmesartan/
amlodipine 10/5 vs. 20/5 vs. 40/5Olmesartan/amlodipine combination has 
better 24 h dose-related improvement in 
BP lowering vs. amlodipine alone
Kai et al. [55], 
parallel group, 
110Losartan 50/HCTZ 12.5 vs. 
losartan 50. Control rate of both 
morning and evening 
hypertension (<135/85 mm Hg): 
54.5 vs. 29.1%Losartan/HCTZ combination was superior 
to high-dose losartan in treating both types 
of morning hypertension
Combination vs. monotherapy of antihypertensive drugs
Shimada et al. 
[56], parallel 
group, 862Olmesartan/azelnidipine vs. 
olmesartan vs. azelnidipineCombination therapy was associated with 
significant reduction in MBPS vs. 
monotherapy of either agents
Miyauchi et al.
[57], parallel 
group, 263Amlodipine/ARB vs. high-dose 
ARBAmlodipine combination regimen 
provides better antihypertensive effect vs. 
ARB alone.
Bilo et al. [54], 
parallel group, 
626Olmesartan/amlodipine vs. 
amlodipineCombination therapy was effective in 
lowering 24 h BP vs. amlodipine 
monotherapy.
Timed dosing of long-acting antihypertensive drugs
Qiu et al. [58], 
crossover, 62Morning vs. evening dosing of 
amlodipine 5 and 10 mgMorning administered amlodipine had a 
better effect on the circadian BP compared 
with evening administered amlodipine in 
mild-to-moderate essential hypertension
Drugs of specific mechanisms
Kario K et al. 
[59], parallel 
group, 611Doxazosin Adding a bedtime dose of an alpha-
adrenergic blocker in patients with 
uncontrolled morning hypertension 
significantly reduced BP and urinary 
albumin excretion rate
Data adapted from a previous study [60]. MBPS morning blood pressure surge, BP blood pressure, 
vs. versus, ARB angiotensin receptor blocker30 Morning Surge of Blood Pressure in Prehypertension and Hypertension446
CV morbidity and mortality in hypertensive patients independently of 24  h BP 
reduction are required. In addition, whether titrating of the home BP level in the 
morning as a means of preventing CV events is superior versus clinic BP has not 
been established. Some of the key known and new aspects regarding MBPS are 
represented in following table (Table 30.4).
Conclusions
BP variability in the form of MBPS is an independent risk factor for CV events. 
There are various pathophysiological mechanisms suggested for MBPS includ-
ing vascular damage of small and large arteries. Home BP monitoring can be a 
useful tool for assessment of MBPS. MBPS needs to be controlled for preventing 
CV events. Long-acting antihypertensives, inhibitors of sympathetic activity, or 
the RAS system administered at bedtime will be a useful strategy in control of 
elevated MBPS and more effective prevention of CV events.Table 30.4 What is known and new about MBPS
What is already known about MBPS
• MBPS is a part of diurnal BP variability [4]
•  Excessive MPBS is a predictor of subsequent stroke events in elderly hypertensive patients 
[45]
•  utomatic measurements of BP by ambulatory monitoring are required to closely examine the 
sleep/awake differences [61]
•  Long-acting drugs are part of the non-specific therapy for controlling morning hypertension 
[45]
What is new about MBPS
• Morning BP may be an independent predictor of CV events [60]
•  Importance of HBPM for the cardiovascular prognosis of hypertensive individuals is recently 
revealed [61]
• Morning HBPM can be the best predictor of stroke event [39]
• Asians shows greater MBPS [39]
•  Evidence proposed three-step strategy for the morning BP-guided management of 
hypertension using HBPM [7]
•  Once-daily dosing antihypertensive agents are now widely used as conventional 
antihypertensive medication [62]
• Renal denervation is effective for reducing morning BP [50]
•  Specific treatment includes the time of dosing of antihypertensive drugs and selecting the 
specific class of antihypertensive drugs, such as inhibitors of sympathetic activity or 
renin-angiotensin system [46]
•  Current hypertension guidelines had some forms of recommendations on the measurement of 
morning BP [63]
•  Masked morning hypertension, as the other forms of masked hypertension, is the emerging 
concept as the Japanese guidelines defined it [64]
•  To improve the management of hypertension in general, and morning hypertension in 
particular, long-acting antihypertensive drugs should be used in appropriate often full dosages 
and in proper combinations [60]
MBPS morning blood pressure surge, BP blood pressure, CV cardiovascular, HBPM home blood 
pressure monitoring
U. M. Jadhav and O. C. Swami447
References
 1. Bromfield S, Muntner P. High blood pressure: the leading global burden of disease risk factor 
and the need for worldwide prevention programs. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2013;15(3):134–6.
 2. Patel PV , Wong JL, Arora R. The morning blood pressure surge: therapeutic implications. J 
Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2008;10(2):140–5.
 3. Parati G, Ochoa JE, Lombardi C, Bilo G. Assessment and management of blood-pressure vari-
ability. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2013;10(3):143–55.
 4. Kario K, Shimada K, Pickering TG. Clinical implication of morning blood pressure surge in 
hypertension. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2003;42(Suppl 1):S87–91.
 5. Jaewon O, Lee CJ, Kim I-C, Lee S-H, Kang S-M, Choi D, et al. Association of morning hyper -
tension subtype with vascular target organ damage and central hemodynamics. J Am Heart 
Assoc. 2017;6:e005424.
 6. Hoshide S, Kario K, Yano Y , Haimoto H, Yamagiwa K, Uchiba K, et al. Association of morning 
and evening blood pressure at home with asymptomatic organ damage in the J-HOP Study. Am 
J Hypertens. 2014;27:939–47.
 7. Kario K, Saito I, Kushiro T, Teramukai S, Tomono Y , Okuda Y , Shimada K. Morning home 
blood pressure is a strong predictor of coronary artery disease: the HONEST Study. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2016;67:1519–27.
 8. Kario K, Pickering TG, Umeda Y , Hoshide S, Hoshide Y , Morinari M, et al. Morning surge in 
blood pressure as a predictor of silent and clinical cerebrovascular diseases in elderly hyper -
tensives: a prospective study. Circulation. 2003;107:1401–6.
 9. Head GA, Lukoshkova EV .  Understanding the morning rise in blood pressure. Clin Exp 
Pharmacol Physiol. 2008;35(4):516–21.
 10. Palatini P, Grassi G. The morning blood pressure surge: a dynamic and challenging concept. J 
Hypertens. 2011;29(12):2316–9.
 11. Sheppard JP, Hodgkinson J, Riley R, Martin U, Bayliss S, McManus RJ. Prognostic signifi-
cance of the morning blood pressure surge in clinical practice: a systematic review. Am J 
Hypertens. 2015;28(1):30–41.
 12. Kario K. Evidence and perspectives on the 24-hour management of hypertension: hemody-
namic biomarker-initiated ‘anticipation medicine’ for zero CV event. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 
2016;59(3):262–81.
 13. Xie JC, Yan H, Zhao YX, Liu XY . Prognostic value of morning blood pressure surge in clinical 
events: a meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2015;24(2):362–9.
 14. Stergiou GS, Mastorantonakis SE, Roussias LG. Morning blood pressure surge: the reliability 
of different definitions. Hypertens Res. 2008;31(8):1589–94.
 15. Kario K.  Vascular damage in exaggerated morning surge in blood pressure. Hypertension. 
2007;49:771–2.
 16. Folkow B. Physiological aspects of primary hypertension. Physiol Rev. 1982;62:347–504.
 17. Kario K.  Morning surge in blood pressure in hypertension: clinical relevance, prognostic 
significance, and therapeutic approach. In: Berbari AE, Mancia G, editors. Special issues in 
hypertension. Milano: Springer Milan; 2012. p. 71–89.
 18. Yano Y , Kario K.  Nocturnal BP, morning BP surge, and cerebrovascular events. Curr 
Hypertens Rep. 2012;14(3):219–27.
 19. Panza JA, Epstein SE, Quyyumi AA. Circadian variation in vascular tone and its relation to 
alpha-sympathetic vasoconstrictor activity. N Engl J Med. 1991;325:986–90.
 20. Brandenberger G, Follenius M, Goichot B, et al. Twenty-four-hour profiles of plasma renin 
activity in relation to the sleep-wake cycle. J Hypertens. 1994;12:277–83.
 21. Patel PV , Wong JL, Arora R. The morning BP surge: therapeutic implications. J Clin Hypertens 
(Greenwich). 2008;10(2):140–5.
 22. Pucci G, Battista F, Anastasio F, Schillaci G. Morning pressor surge, BP variability, and arte-
rial stiffness in essential hypertension. J Hypertens. 2017;35(2):272–8.30 Morning Surge of Blood Pressure in Prehypertension and Hypertension448
 23. Head GA, Reid CM, Shiel LM, Jennings GL, Lukoshkova EV . Rate of morning increase in BP 
is elevated in hypertensives. Am J Hypertens. 2006;19(10):1010–7.
 24. Kario K. New insight of morning BP surge into the triggers of cardiovascular disease-syner -
gistic resonance of BP variability. Am J Hypertens. 2016;29(1):14–6.
 25. Zakopoulos NA, Tsivgoulis G, Barlas G, et al. Time rate of BP variation is associated with 
increased common carotid artery intima-media thickness. Hypertension. 2005;45:505–12.
 26. Marfella R, Siniscalchi M, Nappo F, et al. Regression of carotid atherosclerosis by control of 
morning BP peak in newly diagnosed hypertensive patients. Am J Hypertens. 2005;18:308–18.
 27. Marfella R, Siniscalchi M, Portoghese M, et al. MBPS as a destabilizing factor of atheroscle-
rotic plaque: role of ubiquitin-proteasome activity. Hypertension. 2007;49:784–91.
 28. Pręgowska-Chwała B, Prejbisz A, Kabat M, Puciłowska B, Paschalis-Purtak K, Florczak E, 
et  al. Morning blood pressure surge and markers of cardiovascular alterations in untreated 
middle-aged hypertensive subjects. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2016;10(10):790–798.e2.
 29. Alpaydin S, Turan Y , Caliskan M, Caliskan Z, Aksu F, Ozyildirim S, et al. Morning blood pres-
sure surge is associated with carotid intima-media thickness in prehypertensive patients. Blood 
Press Monit. 2017;22(3):131–6.
 30. Kario K, Shimada K, Matsuo T, et al. Silent and clinically overt stroke in older Japanese sub-
jects with white-coat and sustained hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;38:238–45.
 31. Ishikawa J, Tamura Y , Hoshide S, Eguchi K, et al. Low-grade inflammation is a risk factor for 
clinical stroke events in addition to silent cerebral infarcts in Japanese older hypertensives. The 
Jichi medical school ABPM study, wave 1. Stroke. 2007;38:911–7.
 32. Shimizu M, Ishikawa J, Yano Y , et  al. The relationship between the morning bloodpres-
sure surge and low-grade inflammation on silent cerebral infarct and clinical stroke events. 
Atherosclerosis. 2011;219:316–21.
 33. Hoshide S, Kario K, Yano Y , Haimoto H, Yamagiwa K, Uchiba K, et al. Morning hyperten-
sion is an important risk for stroke in Asian population. From J-HOP study. J Hypertens. 
2015;33(Suppl 1):e126.
 34. Kimura G. Kidney and circadian BP rhythm. Hypertension. 2008;51:827–828 34.
 35. Turak O, Afsar B, Siriopol D, Ozcan F, Cagli K, Yayla C, et al. Morning BP surge as a 
predictor of development of chronic kidney disease. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 
2016;18(5):444–8.
 36. Amodeo C, Guimarães GG, Picotti JC, dos Santos CC, Bezzerra Fonseca KD, Matins RF, et al. 
Morning blood pressure surge is associated with death in hypertensive patients. Blood Press 
Monit. 2014;19(4):199–202.
 37. Kario K. Preceding linkage between a morning surge in BP and small artery remodeling: an 
indicator of prehypertension? J Hypertens. 2007;25(8):1573–5.
 38. Redon J, Bertolin V , Giner V , Lurbe E. Assessment of blood pressure early morning rise. Blood 
Press Monit. 2001;6:207–10.
 39. Hoshide S, Yano Y , Haimoto H, Yamagiwa K, Uchiba K, Nagasaka S, et  al. Morning and 
evening home blood pressure and risks of incident stroke and coronary artery disease in the 
Japanese general practice population the Japan morning surge-home blood pressure study. 
Hypertension. 2016;68:54–61.
 40. Fukuda M, Mizuno M, Yamanaka T, et al. Patients with renal dysfunction require a longer 
duration until BP dips during the night. Hypertension. 2008;52:1155–60.
 41. Kario K. Essential manual of 24-hour blood pressure management from morning to nocturnal 
hypertension. London: Wiley-Blackwell; 2015. p. 1–138.
 42. Kario K.  Morning hypertension: a pitfall of current hypertensive management. JMAJ. 
2005;48(5):234–40.
 43. The Japanese Society of Hypertension Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension (JSH 
2009). Chapter 2. Measurement and clinical evaluation of blood pressure. Hypertens Res. 
2014;37:266–78.
 44. Matsui Y , Eguchi K, Shibasaki S, Ishikawa J, Hoshide S, Pickering TG, et al. Effect of doxa-
zosin on the left ventricular structure and function in morning hypertensive patients: the Japan 
morning surge 1 study. J Hypertens. 2008;26:1463–71.
U. M. Jadhav and O. C. Swami449
 45. Kario K.  Assessment and treatment of morning hypertension: update. J Hypertens. 
2016;34(Suppl 1):ISH 2016 Abstract Book:e29.
 46. White WB, Weber MA, Davidai G, Neutel JM, Bakris GL, Giles T. Ambulatory blood pres-
sure monitoring in the primary care setting: assessment of therapy on the circadian variation of 
blood pressure from the MICCAT-2 trial. Blood Press Monit. 2005;10:157–63.
 47. Hoshide S, Kario K.  Early morning hypertension: a narrative review. Blood Press Monit. 
2013;18(6):291–6.
 48. Hermida RC, Ayala DE, Mojón A, Fernández JR.  Influence of circadian time of hyper -
tension treatment on cardiovascular risk: results of the MAPEC study. Chronobiol Int. 
2010;27(8):1629–51.
 49. Kario K, Pickering TG, Hoshide S, et al. MBPS and hypertensive cerebrovascular disease: role 
of the alpha-adrenergic sympathetic nervous system. Am J Hypertens. 2004;17:668–75.
 50. Kario K, Bhatt DL, Brar S, Cohen SA, Fahy M, Bakris GL. Effect of catheter-based renal 
denervation on morning and nocturnal blood pressure: insights from SYMPLICITY HTN-3 
and SYMPLICITY HTN-Japan. Hypertension. 2015;66(6):1130–7.
 51. Jadhav UM, Kulkarni A.  Comparative efficacy of angiotensin receptor antagonist olmesar -
tan and telmisartan on morning blood pressure surge in hypertension. J Am Soc Hypertens. 
2016;10(4S):e19–38.
 52. Ferrucci A, Marcheselli A, Strano S, Ciavarella GM, Messa F, Calcagnini G. 24-h blood pres-
sure profiles in patients with hypertension treated with amlodipine or nifedipine GITS. Clin 
Drug Invest. 1997;13(Suppl 1):67–72.
 53. White WB, Lacourciere Y , Davidai G. Effects of the angiotensin II receptor blockers telmisar -
tan versus valsartan on the circadian variation of blood pressure: impact on the early morning 
period. Am J Hypertens. 2004;17:347–53.
 54. Bilo G, Koch W, Hoshide S, Parati G. Efficacy of olmesartan/amlodipine combination therapy 
in reducing ambulatory blood pressure in moderate-to-severe hypertensive patients not con-
trolled by amlodipine alone. Hypertens Res. 2014;37:836–44.
 55. Kai H, Ueda T, Uchiwa H, Iwamoto Y , Aoki Y , Anegawa T, et al., MAPPY Study Investigators. 
Benefit of losartan/hydrochlorothiazide fixed dose combination treatment for isolated morning 
hypertension: the MAPPY study. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2015;37:473–81.
 56. Shimada K, Ogihara T, Saruta T, Kuramoto K. Effects of combination olmesartan medoxomil 
plus azelnidipine versus monotherapy with either agent on 24-h ambulatory blood pressure 
and pulse rate in Japanese patients with essential hypertension: additional results from the 
REZALT study. Clin Ther. 2010;32:861–81.
 57. Miyauchi K, Yamazaki T, Watada H, Tanaka Y , Kawamori R, Imai Y , et al. Management of 
home blood pressure by amlodipine combined with angiotensin II receptor blocker in type 2 
diabetes. Circ J. 2012;76:2159–66.
 58. Qiu YG, Chen JZ, Zhu JH, Yao XY . Differential effects of morning or evening dosing of amlo-
dipine on circadian blood pressure and heart rate. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 2003;17:335–41.
 59. Kario K, Matsui Y , Shibasaki S, Eguchi K, Ishikawa J, Hoshide S, et al. An alpha-adrener -
gic blocker titrated by self-measured blood pressure recordings lowered blood pressure and 
microalbuminuria in patients with morning hypertension: the Japan Morning Surge-1 Study. J 
Hypertens. 2008;26:1257–65.
 60. Wang JG, Kario K, Park JB, Chen CH. Morning blood pressure monitoring in the management 
of hypertension. J Hypertens. 2017;35(8):1554–63.
 61. Kaplan NM. Morning surge in blood pressure. Circulation. 2003;107(10):1347.
 62. Kario K.  Prognosis in relation to blood pressure variability: pro side of the argument. 
Hypertension. 2015;65(6):1163–9.
 63. Chiang CE, Wang TD, Ueng KC, Lin TH, Yeh HI, Chen CY , et al. Guidelines of the Taiwan 
Society of Cardiology and the Taiwan Hypertension Society for the management of hyperten-
sion. J Chin Med Assoc. 2015;78:1–47.
 64. Shimamoto K, Ando K, Fujita T, Hasebe N, Higaki J, Horiuchi M, et al. The Japanese Society 
of Hypertension guidelines for the management of hypertension (JSH 2014). Hypertens Res. 
2014;37:253–387.30 Morning Surge of Blood Pressure in Prehypertension and Hypertension451 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_31
Physical Activity and Exercise Training 
as Important Modifiers of Vascular 
Health
Arno Schmidt-Trucksäss
The world is in a permanent process of increasing automation and reduction of 
physical activity during daily work. Machines and robots take over man’s work and 
thereby reduce daily energy expenditure and increase sitting time. Prolonged sitting 
without interruption, predominantly in front of a PC screen, is an independent risk 
factor for cardiovascular events, increasing prevalence of chronic diseases and all- 
cause mortality [1]. Nowadays, sitting time by far exceeds time spent with physical 
activity in the western countries [2]. Compensation of the reduced work-associated 
physical activity through an increase in leisure-time physical activity and exercise 
training provides various health benefits and is recommended for industrialized 
societies. This was inconceivable almost 100 years ago when it was still a privilege 
not having to be involved in strenuous physical work.
The prevalence of physical inactivity has reached almost one-third in the west-
ernized countries and life expectancy of the world’s population would increase by 
0.68 years if physical inactivity were eliminated [3]. It is now among the top ten risk 
factors causing disability-adjusted life years as the sum of life years lost plus years 
suffering from disability [4]. Although the relative risk attributable to physical inac-
tivity is lower than that for smoking, the higher prevalence of physical inactivity in 
the population results in similar population-attributable fractions of both risk factors 
creating the slogan: physical inactivity is the new smoking [3].
A. Schmidt-Trucksäss  
Division of Sports and Exercise Medicine, Department of Sport, Exercise and Health, 
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland
e-mail: arno.schmidt-trucksaess@unibas.ch31452
31.1  Diversity of Physical Activity and Exercise
To understand the effect of physical activity and exercise on vascular health it is 
necessary to, first of all, give a definition. According to Caspersen et al., physical 
activity is defined as “any bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles which 
results in energy expenditure” [5]. Types of physical activity can be occupational, 
sports, conditioning, household, or other activities. Physical activity with the excep-
tion of exercise grossly classifies a behavior [5]. It is preferably implemented into 
daily life. A potentially significant component of weekly physical activity could be 
the active commute to work by foot or by bicycle [6–8]. At the work place, even 
small interruptions of permanent sitting and standing have shown to be beneficial 
for the glucose metabolism [9]. The recommended amount of physical activity per 
week is ≥150 min of moderate physical activity or 75 min of vigorous physical 
activity or any combination of the two with at least 10 min of uninterrupted activity 
per activity bout [10–12].
“Exercise is a subset of physical activity that is planned, structured, and repeti-
tive and has as a final or an intermediate objective the improvement or maintenance 
of physical fitness” [5]. The types of exercise are mainly divided into endurance and 
strength exercises. Typical endurance exercises for health are running, walking, 
bicycling, or swimming. Strength exercises to preserve or increase skeletal muscu-
lature are done with the own body weight or with additional loads exerted by free 
weights or in a weight circuit. Several exercise disciplines are a mixture of both 
components. Popular lifelong activities/sports for health prevention are tennis, golf, 
football, or basketball [10]. Exercise training yields benefits for cardiovascular 
health that are additional to those of habitual physical activity. Leisure-time physi-
cal activity—and not occupational activity—contributes mainly to the conditioning 
of the cardiocirculatory system [13].
Physical fitness is associated with physical activity. It is defined as “a set of attri-
butes that people have or achieve that relates to the ability to perform physical activ-
ity” [5]. Vigorous physical activity contributes to an increase in physical fitness of 
4–5 mL/kg/min in maximal oxygen uptake in previously inactive individuals [14]. 
This confers to an enormous mortality risk reduction of 25–30% [15].
31.2  Effect of Physical Activity on the Population Level
Increasing physical activity and exercise is thus a most important aim of public 
health initiatives to win the fight against the chronic disease epidemic [3], which is 
especially true for cardiometabolic diseases [16, 17]. Both prospective and retro-
spective, large cohort studies have frequently shown a reduction of cardiovascular 
events and mortality in more active people [18]. A dose-dependent effect, increasing 
with higher volume and higher intensity of physical activity and exercise, has shown 
A. Schmidt-Trucksäss453
a reduction of cardiovascular and all-cause mortality of up to 45% compared to 
physical inactivity [3, 19]. In this context, only one-fourth of the time is required 
when exercising with vigorous intensity (jogging) compared to moderate intensity 
(walking) to gain a similar effect in cardiovascular event reduction [20]. Running 
for 20–40 min only one to two times per week was associated with an approxi-
mately 40–50% risk reduction for future cardiovascular events and all-cause mortal-
ity [21]. Even weekend warriors, accumulating all exercise at the weekend or by a 
leisure-time physical activity pattern characterized by one or two sessions per week 
may reduce all-cause and cardiovascular mortality by almost 40% [22]. Thus, inter -
ruption of exercise for more than 3 days still provides a health benefit which has not 
been sufficiently acknowledged in current exercise prescriptions for health. 
Although studies comparing the effect of exercise training and drug treatment on 
cardiovascular and all-cause mortality as endpoints are rare, physical activity has 
been shown to be superior or at least equal to a treatment with antihypertensive or 
lipid-lowering drugs in a meta-analytic approach (339,274 subjects in 305 random-
ized controlled trials (RCT)). This meta-analysis showed an odds ratio for drugs 
versus exercise of 1.34 and 8.66  in favor of exercise for prediabetes and stroke 
mortality, respectively, and an almost equal odds ratio for coronary heart disease 
(0.94) and heart failure (0.99) [23].
31.3  Physical Activity and Exercise—Indirect Pathways 
to Vascular Health
Traditional risk factors for atherosclerosis are known to be positively affected by an 
increase in physical activity and exercise, which is thought to be the dominant way 
to achieve benefits in vascular health. Single effects on risk factors are rather small. 
Blood pressure reduction following endurance [24] or resistance [25] exercise were 
−3.0/−2.4 mmHg (systolic) and −3.9/−3.9 mmHg (diastolic) in normotensive and 
−6.9/−4.9 (systolic) and −4.1/−1.5 mmHg (diastolic; not significant) in hyperten-
sive individuals, respectively. No effects on LDL-, HDL-cholesterol and only small 
effects on triglycerides (−6  mg/dL) have been shown [26]. In summation, the 
“polypill” physical activity may have a bigger anti-arteriosclerotic effect. Going 
beyond classical risk factors, additional benefits arise from anti-inflammatory 
mechanisms, increased insulin sensitivity, improved hemostasis, reduction of the 
sympathetic drive, and antidepressive or other psychic effects. Taking together these 
multiple ways of action, approximately one-third of risk reduction is not explained 
by the indirect effects of physical activity and exercise which has been largely over -
looked in the past [27]. Thus, direct effects of exercise are most likely to at least 
partially close the gap [28]. Among them, the increases in blood flow and to a 
smaller extent the exercise-associated increase in blood pressure are thought to be 
beneficial for the vascular wall (Fig. 31.1).31 Physical Activity and Exercise Training as Important Modifiers of Vascular Health454
31.4  Blood Flow and Vascular Properties
Blood flow increases occur mainly in endurance-type exercises. During maximal 
endurance exercise, cardiac output increases 4- to 5-fold in untrained individuals 
and 7- to 8-fold in elite endurance athletes [29]. At the same time, blood flow in 
conducting arteries that lead to the working musculature increases 10- to 15-fold 
[30, 31] while arteries leading to the brain show only a mild increase of up to 1.3- 
fold [32, 33]. In contrast, the blood flow increase during maximal strength exercise 
is nearly completely restricted above an intensity of 30% of the one repetition maxi-
mum (1RM). This is why especially endurance exercise is associated with an 
increase in arterial shear stress and thus with the release of nitric oxide (NO) by 
endothelial cells in a dose-dependent manner. In general terms, the higher the blood 
flow, the higher the shear stress, the higher the endothelial NO release. NO is the 
most important mediator of a normal endothelial function [34]. NO acts as a strong 
vasodilator by itself and induces a strong anti-atherosclerotic effect in the arteries 
[35]. However, only an intact endothelium is able to produce NO, which is synthe-
sized by the endothelial NO synthase (eNOS or NOS III) via the interaction of dif-
ferent neurohumoral mediators such as acetylcholine [36, 37].
Chronically increased blood flow to the working musculature as typically seen in 
endurance athletes is initially associated with an increased arterial shear stress Traditional risk factors
High blood pressure
Dyslipidemi a
Smokin g
Diabe tes
Gender
Genetic factors etc
Lifestyle chang es
Diet
Mental healt hNon-traditional risk factors
Inflamma tion
Neur ohumor al alt eration
Sympathetic overactivity etc
Induced directly by
blood flow and
intermittent increase
of blood pressurePhysical activity
and exercise
Physical activity
and exerciseIndirect effect on CV risk
~70%Direct effect on CV risk
~30%
Fig. 31.1 The indirect effects of physical activity or inactivity via traditional, nontraditional risk 
factors and lifestyle changes, respectively, explain approximately 70% of the vascular health. 
Around 30% of the “polypill” physical activity  and exercise  seems to be the direct effect of 
exercise- increased blood flow and intermittent increase in blood pressure. The upward pointing 
arrow indicates an increase in physical activity and exercise and vice versa
A. Schmidt-Trucksäss455
triggering an adaptive growth of vascular wall cells that normalize the shear stress 
to a pretraining level [38, 39]. The diameter of conducting arteries leading to the 
working musculature is typically higher in endurance athletes compared to their 
sedentary peers [38, 40, 41]. The adaptive vascular responses are depicted in 
Fig. 31.2.
This adaptation is not visible in arteries without a significant exercise-induced 
increase in blood flow and shear stress [42]. The ideal human model for this phe-
nomenon is tennis players with an increased diameter only of the brachial artery of 
the playing arm [40]. Immobilization, on the opposite, is associated with missing 
intermittent increase of blood flow and adequate stimulus of wall property preserva-
tion. This is also associated with impaired endothelial function, visible in arteries of 
immobilized extremities as a consequence of traumatic injury, paraplegia, or bed 
rest [38, 43, 44].
Areas of the arterial tree with reduced shear stress are the arterial branches which 
as a consequence are prone to develop arterial plaques [45]. Typical sites are the 
carotid bifurcation or the rectangular branches of the medial cerebral artery where 
flow obstructions occur frequently [46].
Structure, arterial diameter
(athletic aerobic exercise training)Arterial perfusion, adequate pressureEndothelial function
Structure, arterial diameter
(immobilization, paraplegia, bed rest)Weeks Months YearsPhysical activity
and exercise
Physical activity
and exerciseArterial stiffness
Arterial stiffnessEndothelial function
Fig. 31.2 Shows the functional and structural adaptations to increased or reduced blood flow and 
blood pressure induced by increased physical activity or exercise training versus physical inactiv-
ity. Endothelial function nearly normalizes to pretraining or de-training level while arterial stiff-
ness and the change of arterial diameter seems to be permanent changes. Note the different time 
courses of functional and structural vascular adaptations.  The arrows indicate the direction of 
change. The green color stands for the improve and red color for the deterioration of the function31 Physical Activity and Exercise Training as Important Modifiers of Vascular Health456
31.5  Blood Pressure and Vascular Properties
During endurance exercise, invasively measured systolic blood pressure increases 
by 50–60% and diastolic blood pressure by 10–20% [47]. Subsequently, the arte-
rial diameter increases during the systole and decreases during the diastole. If 
transmural pressure and thus circumferential stress (calculated as blood pres-
sure × arterial diameter/wall thickness) is chronically increased, i.e., in hyperten-
sion or during high load exercise training, the arterial wall compensates through 
hypertrophy of vascular smooth muscle cells and proliferation of the endothelium 
[48, 49]. The mechanical stimuli for the endothelium are converted into chemical 
signals that trigger cell adaptation [50, 51]. The consequence is either a physio-
logic adaptation or an adverse change of the arterial wall. The latter is character -
ized by hypertrophy of vascular smooth muscle cells, disruption of elastin lamellae, 
increased storage of collagen, and stiffening of the arterial wall (arteriosclerosis) 
and/or plaque formation (atherosclerosis) [52, 53]. This is strongly driven by 
increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [54]. Since exercise ses-
sions usually have durations of less than 2 h, this temporary increase in circumfer -
ential stress and thus increased production of ROS by the endothelium does not 
seem to harm the arterial wall [55]. Adverse effects on the arterial wall are to be 
expected, however, if the pressure is chronically increased due to an unfavorable 
risk factor profile.
Comparing the effects of endurance- and resistance-type exercise, endurance 
exercise with laminar flow conditions and steady increase of shear stress is able to 
reduce the concentration of ROS and preserve and enhance endothelial function. 
Strength exercise with low or no increase of blood flow does not exert a significant 
NO-stimulating effect on the endothelial cell. The temporary increase in blood pres-
sure and thus circumferential stress associated with either endurance or strength 
exercise training does not seem to have lasting negative effects on arterial wall prop-
erties and thus for vascular health.
31.6  Impact of Physical Activity on the Arterial Structure
Arteriosclerosis is a process beginning at its earliest stage with endothelial dysfunc-
tion and ending with an atherosclerotic plaque with or without obstruction of the 
blood flow [56, 57]. Halfway between mild to severe stages of arteriosclerosis are 
the changes of the vascular wall without plaque formation but with thickening of the 
wall. The attraction to assess vascular wall thickening and plaque as biomarkers or 
indicators of vascular health lies in the possibility to visualize these changes nonin-
vasively by high-resolution ultrasound [58, 59]. Although wall thickening is some-
times thought to be a precursor of plaque formation, both carotid intima-media 
thickness (IMT) and plaque presence provide complementary prognostic informa-
tion [60]. The carotid artery is the site where both features of the atherosclerotic 
process are most commonly and easily accessed.
A. Schmidt-Trucksäss457
31.7  Clinical Relevance of Carotid Artery Wall Thickness
The carotid IMT is a well-established predictor of cardiovascular events such as 
myocardial infarction and/or stroke. An increase of 0.1 mm from baseline IMT was 
associated with an increase of age and sex-adjusted relative risk of 16% for cardio-
vascular events in a meta-analysis that included 16 studies with 36,984 participants 
[61]. The risk prediction based on carotid IMT has been shown to be equivalent to 
the Framingham risk score. However, the net reclassification index (NRI) to allocate 
the risk to a higher or lower risk group based on the measurement of the carotid IMT 
is rather small with around 3–4% [62]. In contrast to carotid IMT, carotid plaque is 
better-suited for risk assessment with a NRI of 8.1% for individuals without CV 
disease at baseline. The combination of both achieves a clinical NRI of 21.7% in 
individuals with intermediate risk [63]. Increasing wall thickness of peripheral 
arteries principally has a similar association with cardiovascular risk, but in clinical 
practice the assessment has not yet asserted itself.
31.8  Physical Activity and Carotid IMT
Carotid IMT is not uniformly associated with the level of physical activity. In men 
and women at the age of 44 ± 8 years (N = 614), without carotid arteriosclerosis and 
without increased coronary heart disease risk, an inverse association of time spent 
in sedentary activity and carotid IMT was shown after adjustment for age and the 
established risk factors [64]. At the 3-year follow-up (N  =  495), the increase in 
carotid IMT was not stopped, but carotid IMT showed a significantly lower progres-
sion in individuals engaged in vigorous physical activity compared to those engaged 
in light or moderate physical activity [64].
A similar finding was shown in the Los Angeles Atherosclerosis Study (age 
50 ± 5 years) in which only vigorous aerobic physical activity ≥3.5 times per week 
slowed carotid IMT progression [65]. The sedentary group showed a threefold 
higher progression rate than the regularly active group which persisted after adjust-
ment for several classical and lifestyle-dependent risk factors. This suggests an anti- 
atherosclerotic effect of vigorous activity independent of traditional risk factors. It 
is noteworthy that the rate of progression of IMT was not associated with workplace 
activity implying no benefit for vascular health. The finding is in line with a recent 
study investigating the effect of occupational versus leisure-time physical activity 
on maximal oxygen uptake in which only conditioning leisure-time physical activ-
ity, but not occupational physical activity was associated with an increased maximal 
aerobic capacity [13].
Based on the observed progression rate in healthy individuals, structural changes of 
the carotid IMT take at least 1 year [66– 68]. The only RCT that was exclusively based 
on exercise training and took this into consideration was conducted in middle- aged 
Finnish men (57.2, age range 56.6–57.9 years) with an intervention phase of 6 years 
[69]. The intervention group expended an additional 1515 kcal per week through light 31 Physical Activity and Exercise Training as Important Modifiers of Vascular Health458
to moderate-intensity walking that corresponded to 40–60% of maximal oxygen uptake 
leading to a 16% increase of the ventilatory aerobic threshold compared to a 3.5% 
decrease in the control group. Despite this remarkable increase in aerobic capacity, the 
progression of carotid IMT slowed only in the subgroup of men not taking statins. This 
“insufficient effect” of moderate physical activity on vascular structure gives support to 
thve use of vigorous-intensity physical activity in health prevention.
Another long-term intervention of 4 years duration in premenopausal women 
(353 women, age 44–50 years) aimed at slowing the known accelerated progression 
of atherosclerosis in the transition from premenopause to postmenopause [70]. This 
intervention based on lifestyle changes including dietary advice and increase in 
leisure-time physical activity, equivalent to an energy expenditure of 1000–
1500  kcal/week, was able to significantly slow the progression of carotid 
IMT. Although the additional energy expenditure was even less than in the Finnish 
intervention trial, one may hypothesize that multidimensional interventions may 
amplify the effects of the single components.
These results are in line with a lifestyle intervention study in Germany in 618 
middle-aged individuals (47.0 years at average) free of clinical cardiovascular dis-
ease [71]. The intervention with a mean follow-up of 2.4 years was comprised of 
weekly sessions of structured exercise, dietary education, and mental stress reduc-
tion. Of the 618 participants, 196 participated in the structured program for the first 
6 months, 175 participated for the entire study duration, and 239 participated in no 
structured intervention. The progression of the carotid IMT was significant in par -
ticipants participating in the 6-month intervention (+0.0159  mm, CI +0.0064 to 
+0.0253) and in those participating in no intervention (+0.0127 mm, CI +0.0046 to 
+0.0208), but stopped in participants who participated for the entire duration of the 
study (+0.0060 mm, −0.0036 to +0.0156) [71]. The results indicate the need for a 
continuously running intervention in the primary prevention of vascular disease.
A recent exercise intervention study over 12 months in patients (N = 123) with 
coronary artery disease and diabetes (63.1 ± 7.9 years) showed no effect of com-
bined endurance (2
3 of sessions) and resistance training (1
3 of sessions) on carotid 
IMT [72] although the total exercise volume prescribed was 150 min/week includ-
ing parts of high-intensity interval training (RPE  ≥ 15). However, the patients with 
no atherosclerotic plaque (N = 65) showed a reduction of carotid IMT compared to 
control (−0.034 mm, CI −0.060 to −0.008 vs. 0.013 mm, −0.011 to 0.038). The 
authors interpret these findings as a potentially weaker NO-mediated effect of exer -
cise in areas with plaques, and thus exercise may have only an effect in patients with 
less severe atherosclerotic diseases. All successful interventions attenuating the pro-
gression of carotid IMT were based dominantly on endurance-type exercise. 
Resistance-type exercise showed no effect in healthy volunteers [73].
In children and adolescents the carotid IMT is the only structural vascular bio-
marker to visualize the effect of an increased risk factor burden because more 
advanced stages of atherosclerosis in shape of plaques are not yet present. Further, 
the carotid IMT seems to be more sensitive to changes in the arterial milieu. This has 
been shown in children with an acute infectious disease where a normalization of the 
“swollen” carotid IMT was visible within 3 months after the infection [74]. Therefore, 
A. Schmidt-Trucksäss459
it is no surprise that a recent meta-analysis of 6 RCTs in an obese pediatric popula-
tion (6–18 years, N  = 303) showed a small-to-moderate reduction of carotid IMT 
following exercise training with a duration of 12–24 weeks [75]. All interventions 
were of endurance type, half of them with additional resistant-type exercise. The 
duration of the intervention in weeks or the minutes of exercise per week seemed to 
be the general conditions of success, meaning that longer duration of the intervention 
and higher volume of exercise increases the effect on carotid IMT.
A promising parameter of carotid structure assessed with noninvasive ultrasound 
seems to be the irregularity of the IMT, the IM-roughness, representing an early 
sign of atherosclerotic carotid wall changes [76]. IM-roughness can be automati-
cally quantified and discriminates better between clinically healthy elderly individ-
uals and patients with coronary artery disease [77]. The IM-roughness has been 
shown to be inversely associated with maximal oxygen uptake in healthy lifelong 
physically active men (64.48 ± 3.45 years; N = 51), meaning that fitter men have a 
smoother arterial wall [78]. A recent study in 602 healthy German school children 
(aged 8–18 years) showed that carotid IM-roughness was significantly and nega-
tively correlated with physical fitness (r = −0.212, p < 0.0001). Low physical fitness 
seems to be a strong predictor for the carotid IM-roughness increase [79].
To summarize, endurance-based exercise interventions seem to mitigate the pro-
gression of carotid IMT in a middle-aged to elderly population. The few trials and 
prospective cohort studies with sufficient duration of at least 12 months indicate that 
vigorous intensity seems to be more effective than lower intensity, especially in 
individuals with a lower atherosclerotic disease burden (Fig.  31.3). In children and 
adolescents, carotid IMT might be sensitive to the effects of physical activity and 
change of fitness. Carotid IM-roughness is associated with higher cardiorespiratory 
fitness across the age-span.
Aerobic exercise
Physical activity
IntensityCarotid IMT progression
Duration
Fig. 31.3 Shows the 
effect of aerobic exercise/
physical activity on the 
progression of the carotid 
intima-media thickness 
(IMT). Longer duration 
and higher intensity seems 
to reduce or even stop the 
increase of carotid 
IMT. Higher intensity 
exercise seems to be 
superior to low and 
moderate intensity 
exercise. The upward 
pointing arrow indicates an 
increase in IMT, the 
horizontal arrow indicates 
stagnation of progression31 Physical Activity and Exercise Training as Important Modifiers of Vascular Health460
31.9  Impact of Physical Activity on the Arterial Function
The arterial function is dependent on the regulatory capacity of the endothelium to 
release endocrine hormones (among which NO is one of the most potent one [80]), 
the tonicity of the smooth muscle cells, and the passive properties of elastic fibers 
and connective tissue. All these components contribute to arterial stiffness. Arterial 
stiffness is influenced by ventricular stroke volume, the buffering capacity of the 
arterial tree (Windkessel), and the peripheral wave reflection [81]. Arterial wall 
stiffness increases from the aorta to large elastic arteries and to the peripheral mus-
cular conduit arteries. Lumen narrowing of the aorta and the peripheral arteries and 
local arterial branching create an impedance mismatch causing wave reflections 
traveling back to the central aorta and superimpose with central blood pressure [81, 
82]. The higher the arterial stiffness of central conduit arteries, the faster is the 
propagating and reflecting wave. In an elastic aorta, the reflecting pressure wave 
arrives during diastole augmenting the coronary artery blood flow mainly during 
diastole [83]. In a stiffer aorta, the reflecting pressure wave superimposes with the 
central pressure already during systole causing an increased cardiac afterload with 
subsequent increased cardiac muscle oxygen consumption [84]. In the mid to long- 
term, the consequence is left ventricular hypertrophy as an established risk factor 
for future cardiovascular events and heart failure. Endothelial dysfunction contrib-
utes partially to an increase in arterial stiffness, which has been shown by in vivo 
blockade of NO in the iliac artery [85]. From the clinical point of view, it is impor -
tant to prevent the arterial tree from early arterial stiffening in order to preserve 
cardiac function.
31.10  Pulse Wave Velocity
Pulse wave velocity (PWV) is defined as the velocity of the pulse as it travels from 
the heart to the carotid, the femoral artery or the arteries of the lower leg. An increase 
of the PWV is the result primarily from stiffening of the arterial wall with a loss of 
elastic properties by various processes such as calcification of the media and inter -
nal elastic lamina [86]. The carotid-femoral PWV is usually considered the “gold 
standard” measuring PWV tonometrically as the distance from the measuring site 
over the time delay of the two waveforms (see Fig. 31.4). The beginning of the 
waveforms is termed the foot and the velocity the “foot-to-foot” velocity [87]. The 
brachial-ankle PWV is measured with cuffs wrapped around both upper arms and 
ankles of the subjects lying in a supine position. The cuffs are connected to plethys-
mographic and oscillometric sensors. The brachial-ankle PWV is measured as the 
path lengths from the suprasternal notch to the brachial cuff and from the supraster -
nal notch to the ankle cuff corrected for the height of the individual [88].
The PWV has an independent predictive value for cardiovascular events and all- 
cause as well as CV mortality. One standard deviation increase in carotid-femoral 
PWV was associated with a 30% increase in cardiovascular disease events after 
A. Schmidt-Trucksäss461
adjustment for traditional risk factors [89]. The 5-year overall NRI for coronary 
heart disease and stroke in intermediate risk individuals was 14.8% and 19.2%, 
respectively, and thus better than for carotid IMT and carotid plaque [89]. An 
increase in brachial-ankle PWV by 1 m/s was associated with an increase by 12% 
in cardiovascular events and 13% in cardiovascular mortality adjusted for tradi-
tional risk factors [90]. The ease of use and the independent predictive value are 
arguments among others for the broader usage of PWV in research and clinical Aerobic exercise
Resistance exerciseDuration
Intensity
IntensityPhysical activity
Duration
IntensityChange of PWVCentral wave
Peripheral wave
Fig. 31.4 Shows the effect of aerobic and resistance exercise and physical activity on pulse wave 
velocity (PWV). The positive effect of aerobic exercise on PWV increases with increasing dura-
tion and intensity. Resistance exercise has a small reducing effect at low to moderate intensity but 
increases PWV unfavorably at higher loads of >80% of the one repetition maximum. Physical 
activity decreases PWV stronger with longer duration and intensity. Even low intensities seem to 
have a beneficial effect in elderly people. Sedentarism regarding aerobic exercise or physical activ-
ity increases PWV . The downward pointing arrow indicates a decrease in PWV and vice versa. The 
green color stands for the improve and red color for the deterioration of the function31 Physical Activity and Exercise Training as Important Modifiers of Vascular Health462
practice. For both methods, it still has to be proven that their use improves clinical 
outcomes in addition to and beyond established treatment strategies [60].
31.11  Physical Activity and Arterial Stiffness
Arterial stiffness is determined by functional components promising a faster adapta-
tion to exercise training or to change of physical activity. In contrast to endothelial 
function [28] there are no indications that arterial stiffness will normalize (reverse) 
after structural adaptation has occurred.
Only few population-based studies investigating the association of physical 
activity and arterial stiffness exist. In 198 men and women higher habitual physical 
activity (>6600 steps/day and/or exercised for more than 16 min/day at an intensity 
>3  METs) was associated with lesser stiffening of central arteries [91]. In 538 
healthy Japanese men and women carotid-femoral PWV was lower (better) 
(9.45 ± 19 m/s vs. 8.82 ± 0.16 m/s; P < 0.01) in elderly individuals (63 ± 0.3 years) 
with a higher amount of light physical activity (~700 min/day vs. ~500 min/day at 
an intensity <38% VO 2max). Since it may be easier to promote the replacement of 
inactivity by light physical activity, such as household tasks and other unstructured 
activities especially in inactive individuals due to a lower threshold, this study is of 
high importance for public health by preventing age-related arterial stiffening [92]. 
In the Swiss Cohort Study on Air Pollution and Lung and Heart Diseases in Adults 
(SAPALDIA) high versus no vigorous physical activity (2880 MET min/week vs. 
0 MET min/week) was associated with lower brachial-ankle PWV in elderly indi-
viduals (63.3 years on average) [93]. Moderate and low-intensity physical activity 
was not associated with different PWV . This finding is in contrast to the Japanese 
study [92]. However, ethnic differences might account for that. Another study in the 
SAPALDIA cohort was conducted to analyze potential changes in physical activity 
and their effect on PWV [94]. Men increasing the amount of moderate-to-vigorous 
physical activity to a sufficient level (>150  min/week) from SAPALDIA 2 to 
SAPALDIA 3 (time interval 8.3 years) had a significantly lower PWV than those 
with no change. However, men and women who were permanently sufficiently 
active presented the best arterial stiffness values [94]. In summary, staying active or 
increasing physical activity to a sufficient level at an advanced adult age is good for 
vascular health measured as arterial stiffness. The recommended intensity of physi-
cal activity is not completely clear but any activity seems to be better than complete 
physical inactivity.
Aerobic endurance exercise training has a significant reducing effect on central 
and peripheral PWV . This effect is visible in healthy individuals and in patients with 
chronic diseases such as hypertension or type 2 diabetes. A tendency to a lesser or 
no change is visible in diseases with a more pronounced atherosclerotic progression 
such as chronic kidney disease [95, 96].
Already 4–8 weeks of endurance training were associated with a small reduction 
of PWV (−0.35, CI −0.68 to −0.02) and the effect nearly doubled with a twice as 
long intervention duration of 9–16  weeks (−0.69, CI −1.13 to −0.25) and even 
A. Schmidt-Trucksäss463
further increased with an even longer intervention time (>16  weeks, −1.19, CI 
−1.92 to −0.47). A second influencing factor on PWV was a relative improvement 
in aerobic capacity measured as VO 2max. Even low improvements (<10%) were asso-
ciated with significant decreases in PWV (−0.40, CI −0.52 to −0.28), while every 
additional 5% improvement in VO 2max led to further 0.4 to 0.5 decreases in PWV 
[95] (Fig. 31.4).
In contrast to aerobic exercise, resistance exercise does not exhibit such uni-
form effects on PWV (Fig.  31.4). The ideal resistance training should provide 
strengthening of the musculature without health hazards to the vasculature. 
However, this does not seem to be true for all types of resistance training. The 
existing RCTs varied in training frequency (in average 2–3 weekly sessions) 
and intensity ranging from 20% to 100% of the 1RM [96]. Most programs con-
sisted of concentric-type exercises for several large muscle groups of the whole 
body. Light (≤ 50% 1RM) to moderate intensity (>50–70% of 1RM) showed a 
reduction of PWV of around 5% [96] while high-intensity (≥ 80% 1RM) resis-
tance exercise was associated with a noticeable stiffening of up to 30% [97]. 
One RCT compared lower limb with upper limb resistance training, with an 
increase in PWV of 12.2% (CI 5.6% to 18.8%) for upper limb exercise and no 
effect for lower limb resistance training with an intensity of 80% of 1RM in 
young healthy individuals [98]. Further, eccentric-type resistance training at 
100% of 1RM resulted in a slight decrease of PWV (− 3.9%, CI, − 6.6% to 
−1.2%) while concentric-type resistance training led to increase in PWV (9.9%, 
CI 7.2% to 12.6%) [99].
Several training programs combine aerobic endurance exercise with resistance 
exercise. In those studies, the training frequency amounted to 3 weekly sessions 
with an intensity range of 50–80% of 1RM and 60–90% of maximal heart rate 
(moderate to high-intensity aerobic exercise) [96]. If endurance training directly 
follows resistance training, no change in PWV will occur, suggesting that combined 
exercise may be of particular relevance for the prevention of sarcopenia in elderly 
individuals with a prevalence of hypertension of almost 70–80% beyond the age of 
70 years [100]. However, single studies suggest that the resistance training-induced 
protein complex (mTORC1) which controls protein synthesis and regulates muscle 
mass may be downregulated by aerobic training thus impairing the effect of resis-
tance training on muscle hypertrophy [101]. Therefore, the ultimate aim should be 
to find a favorable type of strength training that sufficiently increases muscular 
strength but does not cause any increases in PWV and thus an increased cardiac 
burden.
To summarize, endurance exercise interventions are most likely to reduce arterial 
stiffness in a healthy population and in patients with several chronic diseases. Because 
of the “functional” nature of arterial stiffness, the positive effects are visible within a 
shorter time frame of only a couple of months and increase with duration and intensity 
of the program. Resistance exercise training has inhomogeneous effects on arterial 
stiffness with an adverse increase following high-intensity training and upper limb 
training and small beneficial effects following low-intensity training and lower limb 
muscle groups.31 Physical Activity and Exercise Training as Important Modifiers of Vascular Health464
References
 1. Chau JY , Grunseit AC, Chey T, Stamatakis E, Brown WJ, Matthews CE, Bauman AE, 
van der Ploeg HP. Daily sitting time and all-cause mortality: a meta-analysis. PLoS One. 
2013;8:e80000.
 2. Biswas A, Oh PI, Faulkner GE, Bajaj RR, Silver MA, Mitchell MS, Alter DA. Sedentary time 
and its association with risk for disease incidence, mortality, and hospitalization in adults: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162:123–32.
 3. Lee IM, Shiroma EJ, Lobelo F, Puska P, Blair SN, Katzmarzyk PT, Lancet Physical Activity 
Series Working, G. Effect of physical inactivity on major non-communicable diseases world-
wide: an analysis of burden of disease and life expectancy. Lancet. 2012;380:219–29.
 4. Lim SS, V os T, Flaxman AD, Danaei G, Shibuya K, Adair-Rohani H, Amann M, Anderson 
HR, Andrews KG, Aryee M, Atkinson C, Bacchus LJ, Bahalim AN, Balakrishnan K, Balmes 
J, Barker-Collo S, Baxter A, Bell ML, Blore JD, Blyth F, Bonner C, Borges G, Bourne R, 
Boussinesq M, Brauer M, Brooks P, Bruce NG, Brunekreef B, Bryan-Hancock C, Bucello C, 
Buchbinder R, Bull F, Burnett RT, Byers TE, Calabria B, Carapetis J, Carnahan E, Chafe Z, 
Charlson F, Chen H, Chen JS, Cheng AT, Child JC, Cohen A, Colson KE, Cowie BC, Darby 
S, Darling S, Davis A, Degenhardt L, Dentener F, des Jarlais DC, Devries K, Dherani M, 
Ding EL, Dorsey ER, Driscoll T, Edmond K, Ali SE, Engell RE, Erwin PJ, Fahimi S, Falder 
G, Farzadfar F, Ferrari A, Finucane MM, Flaxman S, Fowkes FG, Freedman G, Freeman MK, 
Gakidou E, Ghosh S, Giovannucci E, Gmel G, Graham K, Grainger R, Grant B, Gunnell D, 
Gutierrez HR, Hall W, Hoek HW, Hogan A, Hosgood HD 3rd, Hoy D, Hu H, Hubbell BJ, 
Hutchings SJ, Ibeanusi SE, Jacklyn GL, Jasrasaria R, Jonas JB, Kan H, Kanis JA, Kassebaum 
N, Kawakami N, Khang YH, Khatibzadeh S, Khoo JP, Kok C, Laden F, et al. A comparative 
risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor 
clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease 
Study 2010. Lancet. 2012;380:2224–60.
 5. Caspersen CJ, Powell KE, Christenson GM. Physical activity, exercise, and physical fitness: 
definitions and distinctions for health-related research. Public Health Rep. 1985;100:126–31.
 6. Grontved A, Koivula RW, Johansson I, Wennberg P, Ostergaard L, Hallmans G, Renstrom 
F, Franks PW. Bicycling to work and primordial prevention of cardiovascular risk: a cohort 
study among Swedish men and women. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e004413.
 7. Hoechsmann, C., Meister, S., Gehrig, D., Gordon, E., Li, Y ., Nussbaumer, M., Rossmeissl, 
A., Hanssen, H., Schmidt-Trucksäss, A. Effect of e-bike versus bike commuting on cardio-
respiratory fitness in overweight adults: a 4-week randomized pilot study. Clin J Sport Med. 
2017. https://doi.org/10.1097/JSM.0000000000000438
 8. Lusk AC, Mekary RA, Feskanich D, Willett WC. Bicycle riding, walking, and weight gain in 
premenopausal women. Arch Intern Med. 2010;170:1050–6.
 9. Dunstan DW, Kingwell BA, Larsen R, Healy GN, Cerin E, Hamilton MT, Shaw JE, Bertovic 
DA, Zimmet PZ, Salmon J, Owen N. Breaking up prolonged sitting reduces postprandial 
glucose and insulin responses. Diabetes Care. 2012;35:976–83.
 10. Garber CE, Blissmer B, Deschenes MR, Franklin BA, Lamonte MJ, Lee IM, Nieman DC, 
Swain DP, American College of Sports, M. American College of Sports Medicine position 
stand. Quantity and quality of exercise for developing and maintaining cardiorespiratory, 
musculoskeletal, and neuromotor fitness in apparently healthy adults: guidance for prescrib-
ing exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011;43:1334–59.
 11. Vanhees L, de Sutter J, Gelada SN, Doyle F, Prescott E, Cornelissen V , Kouidi E, Dugmore 
D, Vanuzzo D, Borjesson M, Doherty P, EACPR. Importance of characteristics and modali-
ties of physical activity and exercise in defining the benefits to cardiovascular health within 
the general population: recommendations from the EACPR (Part I). Eur J Prev Cardiol. 
2012;19:670–86.
 12. Vanhees L, Geladas N, Hansen D, Kouidi E, Niebauer J, Reiner Z, Cornelissen V , Adamopoulos 
S, Prescott E, Borjesson M, Bjarnason-Wehrens B, Bjornstad HH, Cohen-Solal A, Conraads 
A. Schmidt-Trucksäss465
V , Corrado D, de Sutter J, Doherty P, Doyle F, Dugmore D, Ellingsen O, Fagard R, Giada 
F, Gielen S, Hager A, Halle M, Heidbuchel H, Jegier A, Mazic S, Mcgee H, Mellwig KP, 
Mendes M, Mezzani A, Pattyn N, Pelliccia A, Piepoli M, Rauch B, Schmidt-Trucksäss A, 
Takken T, Van Buuren F, Vanuzzo D. Importance of characteristics and modalities of physical 
activity and exercise in the management of cardiovascular health in individuals with car -
diovascular risk factors: recommendations from the EACPR.  Part II.  Eur J Prev Cardiol. 
2012;19:1005–33.
 13. Mundwiler J, Schupbach U, Dieterle T, Leuppi JD, Schmidt-Trucksäss A, Wolfer DP, 
Miedinger D, Brighenti-Zogg S. Association of occupational and leisure-time physical activ-
ity with aerobic capacity in a working population. PLoS One. 2017;12:e0168683.
 14. Aspenes ST, Nauman J, Nilsen TI, Vatten LJ, Wisloff U. Physical activity as a long-term 
predictor of peak oxygen uptake: the HUNT Study. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011;43:1675–9.
 15. Myers J, Kaykha A, George S, Abella J, Zaheer N, Lear S, Yamazaki T, Froelicher V . Fitness 
versus physical activity patterns in predicting mortality in men. Am J Med. 2004;117:912–8.
 16. Hahn V , Halle M, Schmidt-Trucksäss A, Rathmann W, Meisinger C, Mielck A.  Physical 
activity and the metabolic syndrome in elderly German men and women: results from the 
population-based KORA survey. Diabetes Care. 2009;32:511–3.
 17. Jeon CY , Lokken RP, Hu FB, Van Dam RM. Physical activity of moderate intensity and risk 
of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review. Diabetes Care. 2007;30:744–52.
 18. Manson JE, Greenland P, Lacroix AZ, Stefanick ML, Mouton CP, Oberman A, Perri MG, 
Sheps DS, Pettinger MB, Siscovick DS. Walking compared with vigorous exercise for the 
prevention of cardiovascular events in women. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:716–25.
 19. Powell KE, Paluch AE, Blair SN. Physical activity for health: what kind? How much? How 
intense? On top of what? Annu Rev Public Health. 2011;32:349–65.
 20. Wen CP, Wai JP, Tsai MK, Yang YC, Cheng TY , Lee MC, Chan HT, Tsao CK, Tsai SP, Wu 
X. Minimum amount of physical activity for reduced mortality and extended life expectancy: 
a prospective cohort study. Lancet. 2011;378:1244–53.
 21. Lee DC, Pate RR, Lavie CJ, Sui X, Church TS, Blair SN. Leisure-time running reduces all- 
cause and cardiovascular mortality risk. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:472–81.
 22. O'donovan G, Lee IM, Hamer M, Stamatakis E. Association of “weekend warrior” and other 
leisure time physical activity patterns with risks for all-cause, cardiovascular disease, and 
cancer mortality. JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177:335–42.
 23. Naci H, Ioannidis JP. Comparative effectiveness of exercise and drug interventions on mortal-
ity outcomes: metaepidemiological study. BMJ. 2013;347:f5577.
 24. Cornelissen V A, Fagard RH. Effects of endurance training on blood pressure, blood pressure- 
regulating mechanisms, and cardiovascular risk factors. Hypertension. 2005;46:667–75.
 25. Cornelissen V A, Fagard RH, Coeckelberghs E, Vanhees L. Impact of resistance training on 
blood pressure and other cardiovascular risk factors: a meta-analysis of randomized, con-
trolled trials. Hypertension. 2011;58:950–8.
 26. Kelley GA, Kelley KS, Roberts S, Haskell W. Comparison of aerobic exercise, diet or both on 
lipids and lipoproteins in adults: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Clin Nutr. 
2012;31:156–67.
 27. Mora S, Cook N, Buring JE, Ridker PM, Lee IM. Physical activity and reduced risk of car -
diovascular events: potential mediating mechanisms. Circulation. 2007;116:2110–8.
 28. Green DJ, Hopman MT, Padilla J, Laughlin MH, Thijssen DH. Vascular adaptation to exer -
cise in humans: role of hemodynamic stimuli. Physiol Rev. 2017;97:495–528.
 29. Joyner MJ, Casey DP. Regulation of increased blood flow (hyperemia) to muscles during 
exercise: a hierarchy of competing physiological needs. Physiol Rev. 2015;95:549–601.
 30. Calbet JA, Gonzalez-Alonso J, Helge JW, Sondergaard H, Munch-Andersen T, Boushel R, 
Saltin B. Cardiac output and leg and arm blood flow during incremental exercise to exhaus-
tion on the cycle ergometer. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2007;103:969–78.
 31. Harrison PR, Affara N, Mcnab A, Paul J. Erythroid differentiation in a friend erythroleukemic 
cell X lymphoma hybrid cell line is limited, possibly due to reduced hem levels. Exp Cell 
Res. 1977;109:237–46.31 Physical Activity and Exercise Training as Important Modifiers of Vascular Health466
 32. Hellstrom G, Fischer-Colbrie W, Wahlgren NG, Jogestrand T. Carotid artery blood flow and 
middle cerebral artery blood flow velocity during physical exercise. J Appl Physiol (1985). 
1996;81:413–8.
 33. Sato K, Ogoh S, Hirasawa A, Oue A, Sadamoto T. The distribution of blood flow in the carotid 
and vertebral arteries during dynamic exercise in humans. J Physiol. 2011;589:2847–56.
 34. Furchgott RF.  The 1996 Albert Lasker medical research awards. The discovery of 
endothelium- derived relaxing factor and its importance in the identification of nitric oxide. 
JAMA. 1996;276:1186–8.
 35. Napoli C, Ignarro LJ. Nitric oxide and atherosclerosis. Nitric Oxide. 2001;5:88–97.
 36. Davies PF. Flow-mediated endothelial mechanotransduction. Physiol Rev. 1995;75:519–60.
 37. Moncada S, Higgs A. The L-arginine-nitric oxide pathway. N Engl J Med. 1993;329:2002–12.
 38. Schmidt-Trucksäss A, Schmid A, Brunner C, Scherer N, Zach G, Keul J, Huonker M. Arterial 
properties of the carotid and femoral artery in endurance-trained and paraplegic subjects. J 
Appl Physiol (1985). 2000;89:1956–63.
 39. Tinken TM, Thijssen DH, Hopkins N, Dawson EA, Cable NT, Green DJ. Shear stress medi-
ates endothelial adaptations to exercise training in humans. Hypertension. 2010;55:312–8.
 40. Huonker M, Schmid A, Schmidt-Trucksäss A, Grathwohl D, Keul J. Size and blood flow of 
central and peripheral arteries in highly trained able-bodied and disabled athletes. J Appl 
Physiol (1985). 2003;95:685–91.
 41. Rowley NJ, Dawson EA, Hopman MT, George KP, Whyte GP, Thijssen DH, Green 
DJ. Conduit diameter and wall remodeling in elite athletes and spinal cord injury. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc. 2012;44:844–9.
 42. Huonker M, Schmid A, Sorichter S, Schmidt-Trucksab A, Mrosek P, Keul J. Cardiovascular 
differences between sedentary and wheelchair-trained subjects with paraplegia. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc. 1998;30:609–13.
 43. Giannattasio C, Failla M, Grappiolo A, Bigoni M, Carugo S, Denti M, Mancia G. Effects of 
prolonged immobilization of the limb on radial artery mechanical properties. Hypertension. 
1998;32:584–7.
 44. van Duijnhoven NT, Green DJ, Felsenberg D, Belavy DL, Hopman MT, Thijssen DH. Impact 
of bed rest on conduit artery remodeling: effect of exercise countermeasures. Hypertension. 
2010;56:240–6.
 45. Cunningham KS, Gotlieb AI. The role of shear stress in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. 
Lab Investig. 2005;85:9–23.
 46. Glagov S, Zarins C, Giddens DP, Ku DN. Hemodynamics and atherosclerosis. Insights and 
perspectives gained from studies of human arteries. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1988;112:1018–31.
 47. Robinson TE, Sue DY , Huszczuk A, Weiler-Ravell D, Hansen JE.  Intra-arterial and cuff 
blood pressure responses during incremental cycle ergometry. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
1988;20:142–9.
 48. Boutouyrie P, Bussy C, Lacolley P, Girerd X, Laloux B, Laurent S. Association between 
local pulse pressure, mean blood pressure, and large-artery remodeling. Circulation. 
1999;100:1387–93.
 49. Roman MJ, Pickering TG, Schwartz JE, Pini R, Devereux RB. Relation of arterial structure 
and function to left ventricular geometric patterns in hypertensive adults. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1996;28:751–6.
 50. Davies PF. Hemodynamic shear stress and the endothelium in cardiovascular pathophysiol-
ogy. Nat Clin Pract Cardiovasc Med. 2009;6:16–26.
 51. Johnson BD, Mather KJ, Wallace JP. Mechanotransduction of shear in the endothelium: basic 
studies and clinical implications. Vasc Med. 2011;16:365–77.
 52. Cai H, Harrison DG. Endothelial dysfunction in cardiovascular diseases: the role of oxidant 
stress. Circ Res. 2000;87:840–4.
 53. Malek AM, Alper SL, Izumo S. Hemodynamic shear stress and its role in atherosclerosis. 
JAMA. 1999;282:2035–42.
 54. Munzel T, Camici GG, Maack C, Bonetti NR, Fuster V , Kovacic JC. Impact of oxidative stress 
on the heart and vasculature: part 2 of a 3-part series. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:212–29.
A. Schmidt-Trucksäss467
 55. Spescha RD, Glanzmann M, Simic B, Witassek F, Keller S, Akhmedov A, Tanner FC, 
Luscher TF, Camici GG. Adaptor protein p66(Shc) mediates hypertension-associated, cyclic 
stretch-dependent, endothelial damage. Hypertension. 2014;64:347–53.
 56. Stary HC, Chandler AB, Dinsmore RE, Fuster V , Glagov S, Insull W Jr, Rosenfeld ME, 
Schwartz CJ, Wagner WD, Wissler RW. A definition of advanced types of atherosclerotic 
lesions and a histological classification of atherosclerosis. A report from the Committee on 
Vascular Lesions of the Council on Arteriosclerosis, American Heart Association. Circulation. 
1995;92:1355–74.
 57. Stary HC, Chandler AB, Glagov S, Guyton JR, Insull W Jr, Rosenfeld ME, Schaffer SA, 
Schwartz CJ, Wagner WD, Wissler RW. A definition of initial, fatty streak, and intermediate 
lesions of atherosclerosis. A report from the Committee on Vascular Lesions of the Council 
on Arteriosclerosis, American Heart Association. Circulation. 1994;89:2462–78.
 58. Bauer M, Caviezel S, Teynor A, Erbel R, Mahabadi AA, Schmidt-Trucksäss A.  Carotid 
intima-media thickness as a biomarker of subclinical atherosclerosis. Swiss Med Wkly. 
2012;142:w13705.
 59. Touboul PJ, Hennerici MG, Meairs S, Adams H, Amarenco P, Bornstein N, Csiba L, 
Desvarieux M, Ebrahim S, Hernandez Hernandez R, Jaff M, Kownator S, Naqvi T, Prati P, 
Rundek T, Sitzer M, Schminke U, Tardif JC, Taylor A, Vicaut E, Woo KS. Mannheim carotid 
intima-media thickness and plaque consensus (2004–2006–2011). An update on behalf of the 
advisory board of the 3rd, 4th and 5th watching the risk symposia, at the 13th, 15th and 20th 
European Stroke Conferences, Mannheim, Germany, 2004, Brussels, Belgium, 2006, and 
Hamburg, Germany, 2011. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2012;34:290–6.
 60. Vlachopoulos C, Xaplanteris P, Aboyans V , Brodmann M, Cifkova R, Cosentino F, de Carlo 
M, Gallino A, Landmesser U, Laurent S, Lekakis J, Mikhailidis DP, Naka KK, Protogerou 
AD, Rizzoni D, Schmidt-Trucksäss A, Van Bortel L, Weber T, Yamashina A, Zimlichman R, 
Boutouyrie P, Cockcroft J, O’Rourke M, Park JB, Schillaci G, Sillesen H, Townsend RR. The 
role of vascular biomarkers for primary and secondary prevention. A position paper from 
the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on peripheral circulation: Endorsed 
by the Association for Research into Arterial Structure and Physiology (ARTERY) Society. 
Atherosclerosis. 2015;241:507–32.
 61. Lorenz MW, Polak JF, Kavousi M, Mathiesen EB, V olzke H, Tuomainen TP, Sander D, 
Plichart M, Catapano AL, Robertson CM, Kiechl S, Rundek T, Desvarieux M, Lind L, Schmid 
C, Dasmahapatra P, Gao L, Ziegelbauer K, Bots ML, Thompson SG, Group P-IS. Carotid 
intima-media thickness progression to predict cardiovascular events in the general population 
(the PROG-IMT collaborative project): a meta-analysis of individual participant data. Lancet. 
2012;379:2053–62.
 62. den Ruijter HM, Peters SA, Anderson TJ, Britton AR, Dekker JM, Eijkemans MJ, Engstrom 
G, Evans GW, de Graaf J, Grobbee DE, Hedblad B, Hofman A, Holewijn S, Ikeda A, Kavousi 
M, Kitagawa K, Kitamura A, Koffijberg H, Lonn EM, Lorenz MW, Mathiesen EB, Nijpels G, 
Okazaki S, O'leary DH, Polak JF, Price JF, Robertson C, Rembold CM, Rosvall M, Rundek T, 
Salonen JT, Sitzer M, Stehouwer CD, Witteman JC, Moons KG, Bots ML. Common carotid 
intima-media thickness measurements in cardiovascular risk prediction: a meta-analysis. 
JAMA. 2012;308:796–803.
 63. Polak JF, Szklo M, Kronmal RA, Burke GL, Shea S, Zavodni AE, O’leary DH. The value 
of carotid artery plaque and intima-media thickness for incident cardiovascular disease: the 
multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013;2:e000087.
 64. Kozakova M, Palombo C, Morizzo C, Nolan JJ, Konrad T, Balkau B, Investigators, R. Effect 
of sedentary behaviour and vigorous physical activity on segment-specific carotid wall thick-
ness and its progression in a healthy population. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:1511–9.
 65. Nordstrom CK, Dwyer KM, Merz CN, Shircore A, Dwyer JH. Leisure time physical activity 
and early atherosclerosis: the Los Angeles Atherosclerosis Study. Am J Med. 2003;115:19–25.
 66. Homma S, Hirose N, Ishida H, Ishii T, Araki G. Carotid plaque and intima-media thickness 
assessed by b-mode ultrasonography in subjects ranging from young adults to centenarians. 
Stroke. 2001;32:830–5.31 Physical Activity and Exercise Training as Important Modifiers of Vascular Health468
 67. Rosvall M, Persson M, Ostling G, Nilsson PM, Melander O, Hedblad B, Engstrom G. Risk 
factors for the progression of carotid intima-media thickness over a 16-year follow-up period: 
the Malmo Diet and Cancer Study. Atherosclerosis. 2015;239:615–21.
 68. Schmidt-Trucksäss A, Grathwohl D, Schmid A, Boragk R, Upmeier C, Keul J, Huonker 
M. Structural, functional, and hemodynamic changes of the common carotid artery with age 
in male subjects. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1999;19:1091–7.
 69. Rauramaa R, Halonen P, Vaisanen SB, Lakka TA, Schmidt-Trucksäss A, Berg A, Penttila IM, 
Rankinen T, Bouchard C. Effects of aerobic physical exercise on inflammation and athero-
sclerosis in men: the DNASCO Study: a six-year randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern 
Med. 2004;140:1007–14.
 70. Wildman RP, Schott LL, Brockwell S, Kuller LH, Sutton-Tyrrell K. A dietary and exercise 
intervention slows menopause-associated progression of subclinical atherosclerosis as mea-
sured by intima-media thickness of the carotid arteries. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:579–85.
 71. Mang C. Effect of complex lifestyle intervention on common carotid intima-media thickness. 
Doctoral thesis, University of Freiburg; 2013.
 72. Byrkjeland R, Stensaeth KH, Anderssen S, Njerve IU, Arnesen H, Seljeflot I, Solheim 
S.  Effects of exercise training on carotid intima-media thickness in patients with type 2 
diabetes and coronary artery disease. Influence of carotid plaques. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 
2016;15:13.
 73. Olson TP, Dengel DR, Leon AS, Schmitz KH.  Moderate resistance training and vascular 
health in overweight women. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2006;38:1558–64.
 74. Liuba P, Persson J, Luoma J, Yla-Herttuala S, Pesonen E. Acute infections in children are 
accompanied by oxidative modification of LDL and decrease of HDL cholesterol, and are 
followed by thickening of carotid intima-media. Eur Heart J. 2003;24:515–21.
 75. Garcia-Hermoso A, Gonzalez-Ruiz K, Triana-Reina HR, Olloquequi J, Ramirez-Velez 
R. Effects of exercise on carotid Arterial Wall thickness in obese pediatric populations: a 
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Child Obes. 2017;13:138–45.
 76. Belcaro G, Nicolaides AN, Laurora G, Cesarone MR, de Sanctis M, Incandela L, Barsotti 
A. Ultrasound morphology classification of the arterial wall and cardiovascular events in a 
6-year follow-up study. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1996;16:851–6.
 77. Schmidt-Trucksäss A, Sandrock M, Cheng DC, Muller HM, Baumstark MW, Rauramaa R, 
Berg A, Huonker M. Quantitative measurement of carotid intima-media roughness--effect of 
age and manifest coronary artery disease. Atherosclerosis. 2003;166:57–65.
 78. Sandrock M, Schulze C, Schmitz D, Dickhuth HH, Schmidt-Trucksaess A. Physical activity 
throughout life reduces the atherosclerotic wall process in the carotid artery. Br J Sports Med. 
2008;42:839–44.
 79. Dalla Pozza R, Pirzer R, Beyerlein A, Weberruss H, Oberhoffer R, Schmidt-Trucksäss A, 
Netz H, Haas N.  Beyond intima-media-thickness: analysis of the carotid intima-media- 
roughness in a paediatric population. Atherosclerosis. 2016;251:164–9.
 80. Ghasemi A, Zahediasl S. Is nitric oxide a hormone? Iran Biomed J. 2011;15:59–65.
 81. Avolio A. Arterial stiffness. Pulse (Basel). 2013;1:14–28.
 82. London GM, Pannier B. Arterial functions: how to interpret the complex physiology. Nephrol 
Dial Transplant. 2010;25:3815–23.
 83. Weber T, Auer J, O'rourke MF, Kvas E, Lassnig E, Berent R, Eber B. Arterial stiffness, wave 
reflections, and the risk of coronary artery disease. Circulation. 2004;109:184–9.
 84. O'rourke MF, Staessen JA, Vlachopoulos C, Duprez D, Plante GE. Clinical applications of 
arterial stiffness; definitions and reference values. Am J Hypertens. 2002;15:426–44.
 85. Schmitt M, Avolio A, Qasem A, Mceniery CM, Butlin M, Wilkinson IB, Cockcroft JR. Basal 
NO locally modulates human iliac artery function in vivo. Hypertension. 2005;46:227–31.
 86. Fishbein MC, Fishbein GA.  Arteriosclerosis: facts and fancy. Cardiovasc Pathol. 
2015;24:335–42.
 87. Cavalcante JL, Lima JA, Redheuil A, Al-Mallah MH. Aortic stiffness: current understanding 
and future directions. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:1511–22.
A. Schmidt-Trucksäss469
 88. Munakata M.  Brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity: background, method, and clinical evi-
dence. Pulse (Basel). 2016;3:195–204.
 89. Ben-Shlomo Y , Spears M, Boustred C, May M, Anderson SG, Benjamin EJ, Boutouyrie P, 
Cameron J, Chen CH, Cruickshank JK, Hwang SJ, Lakatta EG, Laurent S, Maldonado J, 
Mitchell GF, Najjar SS, Newman AB, Ohishi M, Pannier B, Pereira T, Vasan RS, Shokawa 
T, Sutton-Tyrell K, Verbeke F, Wang KL, Webb DJ, Willum Hansen T, Zoungas S, Mceniery 
CM, Cockcroft JR, Wilkinson IB. Aortic pulse wave velocity improves cardiovascular event 
prediction: an individual participant meta-analysis of prospective observational data from 
17,635 subjects. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:636–46.
 90. Vlachopoulos C, Aznaouridis K, Stefanadis C. Prediction of cardiovascular events and all- 
cause mortality with arterial stiffness: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2010;55:1318–27.
 91. Aoyagi Y , Park H, Kakiyama T, Park S, Yoshiuchi K, Shephard RJ. Yearlong physical activ-
ity and regional stiffness of arteries in older adults: the Nakanojo Study. Eur J Appl Physiol. 
2010;109:455–64.
 92. Gando Y , Yamamoto K, Murakami H, Ohmori Y , Kawakami R, Sanada K, Higuchi M, Tabata 
I, Miyachi M. Longer time spent in light physical activity is associated with reduced arterial 
stiffness in older adults. Hypertension. 2010;56:540–6.
 93. Endes S, Schaffner E, Caviezel S, Dratva J, Autenrieth CS, Wanner M, Martin B, Stolz D, 
Pons M, Turk A, Bettschart R, Schindler C, Kunzli N, Probst-Hensch N, Schmidt-Trucksäss 
A. Physical activity is associated with lower arterial stiffness in older adults: results of the 
SAPALDIA 3 Cohort Study. Eur J Epidemiol. 2016;31:275–85.
 94. Endes S, Schaffner E, Caviezel S, Dratva J, Autenrieth CS, Wanner M, Martin B, Stolz D, 
Pons M, Turk A, Bettschart R, Schindler C, Kunzli N, Probst-Hensch N, Schmidt-Trucksäss 
A. Long-term physical activity is associated with reduced arterial stiffness in older adults: 
longitudinal results of the SAPALDIA cohort study. Age Ageing. 2016;45:110–5.
 95. Huang C, Wang J, Deng S, She Q, Wu L. The effects of aerobic endurance exercise on pulse 
wave velocity and intima media thickness in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2016;26:478–87.
 96. Li Y , Hanssen H, Cordes M, Rossmeissl A, Endes S, Schmidt-Trucksäss A. Aerobic, resis-
tance and combined exercise training on arterial stiffness in normotensive and hypertensive 
adults: a review. Eur J Sport Sci. 2015;15:443–57.
 97. Miyachi M, Kawano H, Sugawara J, Takahashi K, Hayashi K, Yamazaki K, Tabata I, Tanaka 
H. Unfavorable effects of resistance training on central arterial compliance: a randomized 
intervention study. Circulation. 2004;110:2858–63.
 98. Okamoto T, Masuhara M, Ikuta K. Upper but not lower limb resistance training increases 
arterial stiffness in humans. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2009;107:127–34.
 99. Okamoto T, Masuhara M, Ikuta K. Effects of eccentric and concentric resistance training on 
arterial stiffness. J Hum Hypertens. 2006;20:348–54.
 100. Kearney PM, Whelton M, Reynolds K, Muntner P, Whelton PK, He J.  Global burden of 
hypertension: analysis of worldwide data. Lancet. 2005;365:217–23.
 101. Ogasawara R, Sato K, Matsutani K, Nakazato K, Fujita S. The order of concurrent endurance 
and resistance exercise modifies mTOR signaling and protein synthesis in rat skeletal muscle. 
Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014;306:E1155–62.31 Physical Activity and Exercise Training as Important Modifiers of Vascular Health471 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_32
G. Pucci ( *) 
Department of Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy 
Unit of Internal Medicine, Terni University Hospital, Terni, Italy 
e-mail: giacomo.pucci@unipg.it 
G. Reboldi
Department of Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy 
F. Angeli
Department of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Pathophysiology,  
Hospital and University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy 
D. Turturiello
Department of Medicine, Hospital of Assisi, Perugia, Italy 
P. Verdecchia 
Department of Medicine, Hospital of Assisi, Assisi, Italy
Fondazione Umbra Cuore ed Ipertensione - AUCI ONLUS, Perugia, Italy32Role of Ambulatory Blood Pressure 
Monitoring in Prehypertension
Giacomo Pucci, Gianpaolo Reboldi, Fabio Angeli, 
Dario Turturiello, and Paolo Verdecchia
32.1  Introduction
The term prehypertension appeared for the first time in the Seventh Report of the 
Joint National Committee (JNC-VII) on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation and 
Treatment of High Blood Pressure in 2003 [1]. This category included subjects with 
office systolic BP (SBP) between 120 and 139  mmHg or diastolic BP (DBP) 
between 80 and 90 mmHg. The choice to reclassify what was previously conceived 
just as normal or borderline BP found its rationale on two levels of evidence: first, 
subjects included in this BP category, as compared with subjects with normal or 
optimal BP (BP < 120/80 mmHg), were shown to be at increased risk to became 
truly hypertensives [2]. Second, the CV risk associated with BP values begins to 
increase after 115/75 mmHg, as shown by a large-scale meta-analysis published in 
2001 [3]. The Committee thus recommended close follow-up and possible 472
non- pharmacologic intervention for individuals in this category to reduce the pro-
gression toward sustained hypertension.
Among the large efforts made to describe the main characteristics of subjects 
with prehypertension, and the causes of the associated increased CV risk, ambula-
tory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) played a decisive role. ABPM, in the set-
ting of hypertension and other clinical contexts, was a paradigm shift in the diagnosis 
and management of individuals with elevated BP values. 24 h average BP, or other 
out-of-office BP measurements obtained by multiple readings and including a 
dynamic behaviour, are well acknowledged as the most accurate and representative 
measures of individual’s usual BP. ABPM-derived BP values are more reproducible 
than casual BP [4], less prone to observer bias, more strongly related to target organ 
damage [5], and its prognostic value is clearly superior to that of office BP [6–8].
A number of studies demonstrated that subjects with prehypertension are likely 
to exhibit 24 h BP values that often fall in the range of true hypertension. This phe-
nomenon has been named “masked hypertension”. The prevalence of masked 
hypertension is definitely higher in subjects with prehypertension than in normoten-
sive subjects, and this could in part explain the increased CV risk observed in this 
particular patient category.
Usually, drug treatment in prehypertension is not recommended; however, 
patients with prehypertension and associated masked hypertension more frequently 
develop target organ damage and cardiovascular (CV) events. Therefore, subjects 
with prehypertension and masked hypertension should be well characterized and, 
once the diagnosis is confirmed, they could benefit from drug treatment to reduce 
their overall CV risk. The next section will narratively review the existing evidence 
supporting an increased CV risk in subjects with prehypertension and masked 
hypertension.
32.2  Relationship Between Office and Out-of-Office  
BP Values
In each subject, office BP and corresponding out-of-office BP values are closely 
associated. At the population level, when values of office BP are plotted against 
ABPM-derived 24 h BP, it could easily be observed that values are almost com-
pletely displayed around a straight regression line (Fig. 32.1) [9].
The degree of correlation between these two measures, calculated as Pearson’s 
correlation coefficient, is about 0.6. Similar results were found also with home BP 
monitoring (HBPM) [10]. In statistical terms, that means that less than half of the 
total variance (R-squared) of office BP is explained by out-of-office BP, and the 
remaining variance is equally scattered around the line of predicted BP values: half 
of subjects are therefore characterized to have out-of-office BP higher than values 
predicted from office BP, and half of subjects have out-of-office BP lower than 
office BP-predicted values.
As widely acknowledged, BP measurement is subjected to random error, and 
repeated BP measurement performed on the same subject show the phenomenon of 
G. Pucci et al.473
215
205
195
185
175
165
155
145
135
125
115
105
95
85
90100110120130140150160170180190200Masked
hypertensionTrue
hypertension
White-coat
hypertensionTrue
normotension
210 220230 240250
Office systolic blood pressure (mm Hg)
Home SBP
(mm Hg)
220MH
n = 582
NT
n = 1804WCH
n = 123SH
n = 518
180
140
100
60
60 100 140
Clinic SBP (mm Hg)180 220Daytime systolic blood pressure (mm Hg)
Fig. 32.1 Scatterplots of office systolic blood pressure vs daytime systolic blood pressure (evalu-
ated from 24 h ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (upper side), and home SBP (lower side). 
From Angeli F et al. [9] (upper side) and Tientcheu D et al. [10] (lower side)32 Role of Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension474
the regression to the mean [11]. Since the number of out-of-office BP measures is by 
definition higher than casual BP readings obtained in the office setting, the relative 
weight of the regression to the mean effect on average BP obtained from out-of-
office measurement becomes more noticeable than on casual BP readings. As a con-
sequence, the slope of the regression line between office BP (X-axis) and 24 h BP 
(Y-axis) tends to be lower than the unit order, and the intercept line usually crosses 
the ordinate at values higher than zero. This means that at increasing office BP val-
ues, the absolute difference between office BP and out-of-office BP statistically tend 
to increase. Similarly, at decreasing office BP values, the difference between office 
and out-of-office BP tend to lower. As a matter of fact, 24 h BP values in the range of 
normotension have been shown to be higher than office BP [12].
Nevertheless, there is a wide-held belief that, in absolute terms, ABPM values are 
constantly lower than office BP. Prospective data from the International Database on 
Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring in Relation to Cardiovascular Outcomes 
(IDACO) study suggested that outcome-driven thresholds of ABPM yielding the 
same 10-year cardiovascular risk of office BP corresponding to 140/90 are about 
10 mmHg lower (131/79 mmHg) [13]. This was acknowledged in the recent interna-
tional guidelines [14– 16], leading to the consensus values for the diagnosis of hyper -
tension based on 24 h BP fixed values (Table  32.1), as 24 h SBP/DBP > 130/80 mmHg, 
daytime SBP/DBP > 135/85 mmHg, or night-time SBP/DBP >120/70 mmHg.
As the direct consequence of fixed BP thresholds for the diagnosis of hyperten-
sion based on 24 h BP values, the proportion of subjects that, in the range of prehy-
pertension, display 24 h BP values higher than normal (>130/80 mmHg) is directly 
related to office-BP cutpoint: the higher will be office BP, the higher the prevalence 
of masked hypertension. A number of studies showed that the prevalence of masked 
hypertension is directly related to office BP values. In the IDACO study, a 
population- based study including 11 randomly recruited population cohorts for a 
total of 12.148 participants, the prevalence of masked hypertension was 7.5% 
among normotensives, and 29.3% among prehypertensives [13]. In the Jackson 
Heart Study, a population-based survey exploring the prevalence of masked hyper -
tension among 942 African American patients with normal or high-normal BP 
undergoing ABPM, the overall proportion of masked hypertension was 25.9%. 
Interestingly, the prevalence of masked hypertension had an exponential rather than 
linear increase at increasing categories of office BP, being 15.4% among subjects 
with office BP <100/70 mmHg, 18.1% among subjects with 100–109/70–74 mmHg, 
20.5% among subjects with 110–119/75–79 mmHg, 36.8% among subjects with 
Table 32.1 Consensus 
definition of masked 
hypertensionOffice BP < 140/90 mmHg AND
Daytime BP > 135/85 mmHg
Night-time BP >120/70 mmHg
24 h BP > 130/80 mmHg
Home BP > 135/85 mmHg
This definition is related only to untreated patients. If the 
same condition is found among treated patients, the adopted 
definition is masked uncontrolled hypertension
G. Pucci et al.475
120–130/80–84  mmHg, and 51.4% among subjects with 130–139/85–89  mmHg 
(Fig. 32.2) [17].
Similarly, in the Masked Hypertension Study, among normotensives or untreated 
hypertensive subjects whose mean office BP was 116/75 mmHg, the prevalence of 
masked hypertension was 14.9%. In the entire cohort, the average 24  h BP was 
significantly higher than office BP, and 24 h BP values exceeded office BP more 
frequently than office BP exceeded 24 h BP. As a confirmatory finding, even in this 
study, the probability of having masked hypertension increased at increasing office 
BP values, being 10% in subjects with office SBP between 120 and 130 mmHg, 
34% in those with office SBP between 130 and 135 mmHg, and 50% between 135 
and 140 mmHg. Similar trends were observed also for DBP [12]. On a different 
level, among subjects with masked hypertension, prehypertension was found in the 
84% of the entire cohort [18]. Recently, pooled data from the Masked Hypertension 
Study and the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES; 
2005–2010) were used to impute the ABPM-derived hypertension status for 
NHANES participants and estimate prevalence of masked hypertension among US 
adults with non-elevated clinic BP, no history of overt cardiovascular disease, and 
no use of antihypertensive medication. The prevalence of masked hypertension 
among 139 million US adults with office-BP lower than 140/90 mmHg was 12.3%, 
corresponding to 17.1 million adults misclassified as not having hypertension [19].
When home BP replaced ABPM for the evaluation of out-of-office hypertension, 
the proportion of subjects with masked hypertension, defined as those with average 
HBPM>135/85 mmHg and office BP < 140/90 mmHg, still varied as a function of 60
50
40
30Masked Hypertension Prevalence (%)2015.418.120.536.851.4Prehypertension Normotension
10
0
<100/<70 100-109/70-74 110-119/75-79
Clinic BP (mmHg)120-129/80-84 130-139/85-89
Fig. 32.2 Results from the Jackson Heart Study [17] show how the prevalence of masked hyper -
tension among office BP categories follows an exponential distribution32 Role of Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension476
office BP levels. In the International Database of Home Blood Pressure in Relation to 
Cardiovascular Outcome (IDHOCO) study, an individual-participant meta- analysis of 
more than 5000 participants recruited from six populations, the prevalence of masked 
hypertension was 5% among participants with optimal office BP (<120/80 mmHg), 
18.4% among subjects with office BP between 120/80 and 129/84 mmHg, and 30.4% 
among subjects with office BP between 130/85 and 140/90 mmHg [20].
The diagnosis of masked hypertension is not only referred to 24 h or home aver -
age BP values, but also include patients with elevated BP only in the awake or 
asleep period, defined as daytime BP > 135/85 or night-time BP > 120/70 mmHg, 
respectively.
Although the term “masked hypertension” is generally referred only to treatment- 
naïve patients, when elevated 24 h BP among treated hypertensives is found at face 
of controlled office BP (<140/90 mmHg), they are classified as having “masked 
uncontrolled hypertension”. Interestingly, the prevalence of masked uncontrolled 
hypertension is higher than masked hypertension. Part of this finding is explained 
by a higher treatment-induced BP reduction on office BP than on 24 h BP, as it was 
demonstrated in a meta-analysis including 44 studies [21].
In the large dataset of the Spanish Society of Hypertension Ambulatory Blood 
Pressure Monitoring, including more than 62,700 patients, the prevalence of masked 
uncontrolled hypertension was 31.1%. Among subjects with masked uncontrolled 
hypertension, the proportion of nocturnal masked hypertension (normal 24 h day-
time BP values and elevated 24 h nocturnal BP values) was 28% and almost doubled 
the proportion of subjects with masked daytime hypertension (elevated 24 h daytime 
BP values and normal 24 h nocturnal BP values) [22]. This suggest that the diagnosis 
of masked hypertension (or masked uncontrolled hypertension) is sensitive to BP 
thresholds adopted, and also that ABPM, as compared to other methods for the evalu-
ation of out-of-office BP not properly suited for nocturnal BP measurement, may be 
more sensitive in capturing a relatively higher proportion of subjects with masked 
hypertension due to increased BP levels only in the nocturnal interval.
32.3  Reproducibility of the Diagnosis  
of Masked Hypertension
The diagnosis of masked hypertension is based on two BP measures: the office and 
the out-of-office (ABPM or HBPM) BP. Therefore, the reproducibility of the diag-
nosis is inherently dependent upon the reproducibility of each assessment. Some 
studies addressed this issue on patients undergoing repeated measures of office BP 
and ABPM. In a small study, the reproducibility of masked hypertension was tested 
in 82 subjects undergoing repeated ABPM assessment for standard clinical indica-
tions. Masked hypertension was diagnosed by means of awake BP (>135/85 mmHg). 
Office DBP significantly changed between the first and the second assessment 
(153/85 vs. 149/82 mmHg, p for DBP change <0.05), while awake BP demonstrated 
a more stable behaviour (141/82 vs. 139/81, p for SBP/DBP changes = n.s.). The 
test-retest correlation coefficients confirmed that office SBP correlation was 
G. Pucci et al.477
significantly inferior to awake SBP. Masked hypertension was diagnosed in seven 
patients at first visit; of those, only four confirmed this status at the second visit. The 
number of subjects with masked hypertension at visit 2 was 15, and most of these 
patients had initially sustained hypertension [23].
Another study tested the short-term reproducibility of the diagnosis of masked 
hypertension using office and home BP readings performed about 2 weeks apart in a 
cohort of hypertensive patients under-treated with an angiotensin II receptor blocker. 
The prevalence of masked (uncontrolled?) hypertension increased from 8% at the 
first visit to 18% at the second visit. The main determinant of such findings was a 
significant change in office BP between the two visits, whereas HBPM values did not 
significantly change [24]. The long-term reproducibility of masked hypertension was 
recently assessed in a cohort of 839 untreated patients undergoing repeated office BP 
and ABPM during a period of 3 months. As compared to normotension, white-coat 
hypertension and sustained hypertension, masked hypertension showed the least pro-
portion of reproducibility, being confirmed in only 47% of subjects. Interestingly 
33% of masked developed sustained hypertension, and a higher office DBP at first 
evaluation was the unique determinant of this progression [25].
Taken together, these results show that masked hypertension is a poorly reproduc-
ible condition both in the short-term and long-term. This is in large part due to the 
short-term and long-term variability of office-BP. This finding is opened to a number 
of interpretation; nevertheless, it seems to add a point in favour of those supporting 
an ABPM-based approach for hypertension diagnosis and management [26].
32.4  Risk Factors for Masked Hypertension
The factors associated with the occurrence of masked hypertension among normo-
tensives and prehypertensives are still the focus of active research. The importance 
of correctly stratifying the risk of masked hypertension could have important clini-
cal and practical implications, including a compelling indication for ABPM or 
HBPM screening despite normal office BP levels.
Several studies suggest that the risk of masked hypertension is higher in young 
subjects and progressively decreases with ageing, as the result of a steeper trajectory 
of office BP with ageing as compared with ABPM. A potential confounding factor, 
in part related to this finding, is that young subjects are more physically active than 
older counterparts, and therefore more exposed to exercise-induced BP fluctuations 
[27]. However, to the best of our knowledge, no studies compared the prevalence of 
masked hypertension among different age categories with similar values of office BP.
An interesting study showed that, during a brief low-level cycling exercise (60–
70% of age-predicted maximal heart rate), subjects with masked hypertension reach 
significantly higher SBP values than normotensive subjects. An exercise SBP higher 
than 175 mmHg during low-level physical activity was able to identify subjects with 
masked hypertension with 74% sensitivity and 67% specificity. Therefore, subjects 
with masked hypertension are characterized by an increased pressor response to 
low-level exercise [28]. However, it should be pointed out that the group of subjects 32 Role of Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension478
with masked hypertension had significantly higher office BP levels as compared 
with normotensive group.
Masked hypertension was also associated with job strain in “white-collar” men. 
The risk of masked hypertension was doubled (adjusted odds ratio, 2.07; 95% con-
fidence interval, 1.30–3.31) for men in the active group characterized by high psy-
chological demands and high decision latitude [29]. Taken together, these findings 
suggest that masked hypertension could be the result of more pronounced and 
repeated BP responses to physical and mental stressors.
Smoking status and alcohol consumption were also associated with an increased 
risk of masked hypertension. In fact, both smoking exposure and alcohol consump-
tion elicit acute pressor effects that could last for many hours after the exposure, and 
are therefore more easily captured by out-of-office BP measurement [17, 30, 31].
Obesity and associated metabolic disorders are frequently found among subjects 
with masked hypertension. The prevalence of masked hypertension among subjects 
with the metabolic syndrome was evaluated in the Finn-Home study, a population-  
based nationwide registry enrolling 1582 subjects undergoing office and out-of- office 
BP evaluation. As compared to normotensives and white-coat hypertensives, subjects 
with masked hypertension had nearly doubled odds for the metabolic syndrome and 
insulin resistance. Consistent results were found when home BP replaced average 24 h 
BP. Among the components of the metabolic syndrome, increased body mass index 
and waist circumference were the major determinants of masked hypertension [32].
Masked hypertension had often been found in subjects with obstructive sleep 
apnoea [33, 34], a commonly associated condition in patients with hypertension and 
obesity. Usually, in these patients, masked hypertension is due to nocturnal BP 
increases, in turn a consequence of the repeated sympathetic activations induced by 
apnea-hypopnea episodes [35]. Interestingly, a relationship between masked hyper -
tension and poor sleep quality has been recently reported. The study demonstrated 
impaired sleep quality, measured by the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, in subjects 
with masked hypertension, particularly those with a non-dipper pattern [36].
The prevalence of masked hypertension is also increased in patients with diabetes 
mellitus and chronic kidney disease. Among normotensive subjects enrolled in the 
IDACO study, the prevalence of masked hypertension was found to be 29.3% in diabetic 
patients, and 18.8% in non-diabetics. The authors also showed that the CV risk of sub-
jects with diabetes mellitus and masked hypertension was almost comparable to untreated 
stage I hypertensive subjects. Based on author’s perspective, this would require specific 
attention, because the increased risk of masked hypertension among diabetic individuals 
could justify the routine assessment of 24 h BP in this high-risk group. However, it should 
also be noted that the group of untreated diabetic subjects, where the increased prevalence 
of masked hypertension was found, had higher average office BP values as compared to 
non-diabetic individuals (129/76 vs. 120/72 mmHg) [37].
In chronic kidney disease (CKD), the prevalence of masked hypertension ranged 
between 16% and 20% [38, 39]. In a meta-analysis of 54 cross-sectional studies 
evaluating out-of-office BP in CKD patients through home BP or 24 h BP, the prev-
alence of masked hypertension among normotensive subjects varied between 4.7 
and 31.3% due to different threshold classifications adopted for the diagnosis. When 
G. Pucci et al.479
studies were selected based on stricter definitions, the average weighted prevalence 
of masked hypertension was 19.8% [40]. Another recent meta-analysis, based on 70 
studies reporting values of office BP and out-of-office BP for a total of 86,167 sub-
jects included in the final analysis, provided a unique opportunity to describe the 
risk associated with the main determinants of masked hypertension in a large-scale 
setting. In keeping with previous evidence, the study showed that masked hyperten-
sion, either diagnosed by ABPM or HBPM, was associated with male sex (OR 
1.47), body mass index (OR 1.07 per 1 Kg/m2 increase), smoking status (OR 1.32), 
and systolic office BP (OR 1.10 per 1 mmHg increase) [41].
The main characteristics associated with an increased risk of having masked 
hypertension are reported in Table 32.2.
In summary, an increased risk is found in young subjects with prehypertension, 
smokers or heavy drinkers, obese subjects with metabolic syndrome or overt type II 
diabetes, sleep apnoea or sleep disturbances, or with chronic kidney disease. A 
Table 32.2 Main predictors 
of masked hypertension. 
References for each category 
are reported in the textPredictors of masked hypertension
Prehypertension
High physical or mental stress at work/home
Smoking, excessive alcohol consumption
Metabolic syndrome
Diabetes
Chronic kidney disease
Obstructive sleep apnea
Poor exercise tolerance
Clinically nor motensive  subjects
Control of
risk factorsLow probability of MH
Normal va lues
Increased va lues
Mask ed hypertension
(consider dr ug treatment)Consider
self-measured BP
and
ABPHigh probability of MH
(Preh ypertension, smoking, alcohol
consumption, male gender , diabetes ,
obesity , high en vironmental stress)
Fig. 32.3 Suggested algorithm for the identification and management of subjects with masked 
hypertension. ABP ambulatory blood pressure, BP blood pressure, MH masked hypertension. 
From Angeli F et al. [9]32 Role of Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension480
previously published algorithm [9] for the identification and management of sub-
jects with masked hypertension is reported in Fig. 32.3.
32.5  Masked Hypertension and Target Organ Damage
The association between masked hypertension and markers of hypertension-related 
target organ damage had been reported in several studies. Most studies showed a 
stronger association between 24 h BP over office BP with target organ damage, a 
finding that was consistently reported across different clinical conditions [42]. The 
presence of target organ damage in masked hypertension may also explain the 
increased CV risk of this population. The strength of the association and the number 
and type of organ damage associated with masked hypertension are therefore of 
high clinical relevance.
In a seminal study by Liu JE et al., echocardiography and arterial ultrasonogra-
phy were performed in a cohort of 359 subjects, classified as sustained normoten-
sives (office BP < 140/90 and awake BP <134/90, n. 234), sustained hypertensives 
(office BP > 140/90 and awake BP >134/90, n. 64), and white-coat normotensives 
(n. 61), a different term defining subjects with normal office BP (<140/90 mmHg) 
and elevated awake BP (>134/90 mmHg). As compared to sustained normotensives, 
patients with white-coat normotension (or masked hypertension) showed signifi-
cantly increased values of left ventricular mass (LVM) and relative wall thickness, 
while no difference were found in comparison to sustained hypertensives. Similarly, 
common carotid intima-media thickness (c-IMT) in white-coat normotensives was 
not different from what was observed among sustained hypertensives [43].
Results from the Jackson Heart Study were confirmatory and strongly supported 
this view: subjects with masked hypertension had increased left ventricular mass as 
compared with normotensives, even after adjustment for a number of confounding 
factors such as age, sex and other cardiovascular risk factors (82 vs. 75  g/m2, 
p < 0.001). Values found among sustained hypertensives (81 g/m2) were generally 
in line with those found among masked hypertensives. Carotid Intima Media 
Thickness (c-IMT) showed the same behaviour: after adjustment for covariates, 
c-IMT was found to be significantly higher in subjects with masked hypertension 
than in normotensives (0.75 vs. 0.72 mm, p < 0.05). Among sustained hyperten-
sives, c-IMT was slightly higher than masked hypertension (0.78 mm), although 
this difference was not formally tested. In the same study, the authors also observed 
increased values of microalbuminuria in masked hypertensives versus normoten-
sives [17]. In a meta-analysis enrolling 2752 untreated subjects aimed at exploring 
the relationship between c-IMT and hypertension categories, a progressive increase 
in c-IMT was shown from normotension (0.68  mm) to masked hypertension 
(0.76 mm, p < 0.01 vs. normotensives) to sustained hypertension (0.79 mm, p < 0.01 
vs. normotensives). Of note, after adjustment for publication bias the statistical dif-
ference between groups was attenuated [44].
The Masked Hypertension Study added novel findings to the relationship 
between masked hypertension, prehypertension, and cardiac target organ damage. 
G. Pucci et al.481
Subjects with office BP <140/90 mmHg were divided into three categories: subjects 
with optimal BP and masked hypertension, prehypertensives without masked hyper -
tension, and prehypertensives with masked hypertension. The three groups, as 
expected, showed slight differences in BP and other clinical characteristics. In a 
multivariable analysis, after adjustment for age, sex, BMI, race, current smoking, 
hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, family history of hypertension and physical activ-
ity, LV mass in patients with optimal BP and masked hypertension (57 g/m2) was 
significantly lower than both subjects with prehypertension without masked hyper -
tension (66  g/m2) and subjects with prehypertension and masked hypertension 
(69  g/m2, Fig.  32.4). The difference between prehypertensive subjects with and 
without masked hypertension was not significant. The authors concluded that sub-
jects with optimal BP, despite masked hypertension, are not prone to develop target 
organ damage, and a 24 h BP evaluation in these patients might not be warranted. 
However, it should be noted that the conclusions are weakened by the limited num-
ber of patients with optimal BP and masked hypertension (n = 18) [18].
Findings from the Masked Hypertension Study also disclosed that subjects with 
masked hypertension share the same degree of diastolic dysfunction, evaluated through 
cardiac tissue Doppler, than patients with sustained hypertension. Compared to normo-
tensives, these participants were characterized by a significant increase of E/E’ ratio 
(6.20 for masked hypertension, 6.57 for sustained hypertension, p  = 0.47, both p < 0.05 
vs. normotensives) [45]. Interestingly, the same relationship was found in a cohort 
study of treated hypertensive patients, with at least one CV risk factor, undergoing 
cardiac Doppler evaluation. Among patients with masked uncontrolled hypertension, 505560657075
Optimal BP
+
Mask ed HTN
N = 18Pre-HTN
+
NO Mask ed HTN
N = 18 0Pre-HTN
+
Mask ed HTN
N = 97LV mass, g/m2*
*****
* p<0.01
** p=0.0 1
*** p=0.19
Fig. 32.4 Left ventricular mass levels according to categories of office and 24 h BP. BP blood 
pressure, LV  left ventricular, HTN hypertension. Adapted from Shimbo F et al. [18]32 Role of Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension482
the E/E’ ratio was significantly higher than in subjects with controlled hypertension 
(8.3 vs. 7.3, p = 0.02), without any statistically significant difference with the group of 
subjects with uncontrolled hypertension (8.3 vs. 8.3) [46]. Confirmatory results were 
shown among diabetic subjects [47] and in general population [48].
The strong relationship between masked hypertension and markers of target 
organ damage was also found when the diagnosis was made according to home BP 
monitoring. In the Finn-Home study, subjects with masked hypertension, defined as 
office BP <140/90 mmHg and home BP > 135/85 mmHg, showed increased odds 
for having left ventricular hypertrophy, evaluated through ECG as the Cornell volt-
age criteria. After adjustment for sex, age and other covariates, the Cornell voltage 
in the group of masked hypertensives was similar to sustained hypertensive and 
significantly higher to both normotensives and white-coat hypertensives [49]. In the 
Hisayama study, a cross-sectional survey of about 3000 community-dwelling 
Japanese subjects undergoing office- and home-BP evaluation, c-IMT and the bur -
den of carotid plaques found among masked hypertensives were comparable to 
those observed in sustained hypertensives, and significantly higher than values 
observed in the normotensive group [50].
Some interesting observations shed lights on the occurrence of organ damage in 
prehypertension. In an untreated population of 807 subjects, higher values of c-IMT 
were found among prehypertensives as compared to normotensives. However, when 
prehypertensives were split according to the presence of masked hypertension, the 
group of prehypertensives without masked hypertension showed similar degrees of 
organ damage as normotensives (0.65 mm in normotensives, 0.65 mm in prehyper -
tensives without masked hypertension); these values were significantly lower than 
what were found among prehypertensives with masked hypertension (0.71  mm) 
[51]. Another finding from the Jackson Heart Study came to the same results by 
analysing values of left ventricular mass in a mixed population of 909 hyperten-
sives. The authors described that masked hypertension carried an increased risk of 
higher LV mass, even after adjustment for prehypertensive status [52].
Overall, the previous results unremarkably demonstrated the need to perform 
ABPM or other out-of-office BP assessment among prehypertensives in order to 
better refine the risk of organ damage.
The association of masked hypertension with arterial stiffness deserves special 
attention, because, especially when expressed as carotid-to-femoral pulse wave 
velocity (cf-PWV), arterial stiffness is critically dependent from blood pressure 
measured at the time of evaluation. Therefore, the evaluation of pulse wave velocity 
is dependent on instantaneous blood pressure. Based on this evidence, one might 
expect that subjects with normal or near-normal office BP should have lower cf- 
PWV values as compared with both sustained and white-coat hypertension. In a 
population of 539 never-treated Italian hypertensives, Schillaci et  al. reported 
increased values of cf-PWV in subjects with white-coat hypertension as compared 
to normotensives, after adjustment for age, sex and heart rate (9.3 m/s vs. 8.3 m/s, 
p < 0.05). However, when the entire population was split according to the difference 
between office and 24 h BP, subjects whose 24 h BP was higher than predicted from 
office-BP showed increased values of cf-PWV than subjects with 24 h BP lower 
G. Pucci et al.483
than predicted (9.9 m/s vs. 9.5 m/s, p < 0.05). This resulted despite the two groups 
shared, by definition, the same office-BP values. These results suggest that chronic 
hypertension-related structural damage to the arterial wall result in an increased 
pressure-independent component of arterial stiffness [53]. Therefore, subjects with 
masked hypertension, as compared to normotensives, could be at risk of having 
increased pressure-independent arterial stiffness.
Some studies confirmed this hypothesis. Among 414 diabetic patients undergo-
ing clinical evaluation for the diagnosis of masked hypertension, subjects with nor -
mal office BP and masked nocturnal hypertension showed increased cf-PWV values 
than patients with nocturnal normotension (10.2 m/s vs. 9.4 m/s, p = 0.03) [54]. In 
the subgroup of untreated patients from the Dallas Heart Study, a multi-ethnic popu-
lation cohort, subjects with masked hypertension and with white-coat hypertension 
were both characterized by increased values of cf-PWV as compared to normoten-
sives (5.53  m/s in white-coat hypertensives, 5.39  m/s in masked hypertensives, 
4.56  in normotensives, p  <  0.01), even after adjustment for confounders [10]. 
Another study, by confirming the same results, showed a gender-specific association 
between masked hypertension and target organ damage, being stronger in the female 
sex than in men [55].
32.6  Prognostic Significance of Masked Hypertension 
in Prehypertension
The prognostic implications of masked hypertension had been addressed by several 
prospective studies, most of which did not stratify subjects based on the presence of 
prehypertension. However, from a broader perspective, the main aim of these stud-
ies was to test whether subjects exposed to an increased BP load, irrespective of 
office BP values, are at increased risk of developing cardiovascular events. In other 
terms, if it is demonstrated that the relationship between out-of-office BP with car -
diovascular morbidity and mortality is stronger than office BP, this indirectly sup-
port the usefulness of 24 h pressure load in prehypertension [56].
Bjorklund et al., in 2003, were among the first to demonstrate, in untreated elderly 
men, that subjects classified as having “isolated ambulatory hypertension” (office 
BP < 140/90 mmHg and daytime BP >135/85 mmHg, a definition that correspond to 
masked hypertension) were at increased risk of developing cardiovascular morbidity 
over a period of 8.4 years. Interestingly, the risk associated with this condition (haz-
ard ratio -HR- 2.77) was of the same magnitude of that associated with sustained 
hypertension (HR 2.94), even though this was not formally tested. Moreover, when 
ambulatory daytime SBP was introduced as a continuous variable, the association 
was independent from office SBP [57]. Confirmatory results were described in the 
Ohasama study, where 1.332 subjects from general population underwent office and 
24 h BP evaluation, and were prospectively followed for 10 years. The adjusted risk 
for CV events for masked hypertension was 2.13, and it was consistent with the esti-
mate for sustained hypertension (HR 2.26), whereas the risk associated with white-
coat hypertension did not differ from normotension [58] (Fig. 32.5).32 Role of Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension484
In The IDACO study, an international database made of 7030 individuals from 4 
countries, subjects were followed for an average period of 9.5 years. Patients with 
masked hypertension, irrespective of which daytime BP threshold was adopted for 
the diagnosis (130/80 or 135/85 mmHg), showed increased odds for cardiovascular 
and cerebrovascular events, as compared to both normotensives and white-coat 
hypertensives. The study was the first to demonstrate that the risk for CV events 
associated with masked hypertension (HR 2.11) and sustained hypertension (HR 
2.08) were of the same order of magnitude. Furthermore, when office BP was forced 
along with 24 h BP and other covariates in a Cox-regression model, both office SBP 
and DBP lost their predictive value, while 24 h SBP and DBP retained their prog-
nostic significance [7].
Masked uncontrolled hypertension also confers an increased risk of CV events. In 
a cohort of 742 treated hypertensives, the CV risk associated with masked uncon-
trolled hypertension (defined as treated office BP < 140/90 mmHg and daytime BP 
>135/85  mmHg) was significantly higher than controlled hypertension (RR 2.28), 
while the risk associated with resistant hypertension was of a greater extent (RR 2.94).
A worse prognosis was also found when masked hypertension was diagnosed 
according to home BP values. In a cohort of 4939 elderly treated hypertensives, as 
compared to subjects with controlled hypertension, individuals with masked uncon-
trolled hypertension had a nearly doubled risk of adverse cardiovascular outcome 
(HR 2.06), after adjustment for confounding factors. The study also confirmed that 
home BP, but not office BP, was significantly associated with adverse prognosis (RR 
1.17 for any increase in 1 SD of SBP, RR = 1.12 for any increase in 1SD of DBP) 
[59]. A large-scale prospective observational study which enrolled 21.591 Events/
Patients25/581
SNBP6/93
WCHT20/147
MHT20/106
SHT
(1.28 – 4.38)(1.41 – 4.65)(0.39 –2.33)3Untreated subjects
2.56
1.00 0.952.36
2
1RH (95%CI)Fig. 32.5 Relative 
hazards (RH) and 95% 
confidence intervals (CI) of 
sustained normal blood 
pressure (SNBP), 
white-coat hypertension 
(WCHT), masked 
hypertension (MHT), and 
sustained hypertension 
(SHT) for risk of the 
composite of 
cardiovascular disease 
(CVD) mortality/stroke 
morbidity. The SNBP 
group was treated as the 
reference category. From 
Ochubo T et al. [58]
G. Pucci et al.485
hypertensive Japanese patients treated with olmesartan, came to similar conclusions 
by observing that subjects with elevated morning home SBP (>145 mmHg) and 
normal office SBP (<130 mmHg) had an increased risk of cardiovascular events as 
compared to individuals with normal morning home SBP (<125 mmHg) and normal 
office SBP (<130 mmHg). In this population, the cut-off values for both home and 
office BP were derived from spline regression analysis as those corresponding to 
maximum and minimum CV risk [60].
Stergiou et  al. investigated the prognostic meaning of masked hypertension 
evaluated by HBPM in the International Database of HOme blood pressure in 
relation to Cardiovascular Outcomes (IDHOCO) study, a population-based inter -
national database enrolling subjects from five populations. Among untreated sub-
jects (n  = 5007), the risk of adverse CV events was found increased in masked 
hypertensives (adjusted HR 1.57) and in white-coat hypertensives (adjusted HR 
1.42); the risk associated with sustained hypertension was significantly higher 
(adjusted HR 2.13). The two novel findings from this study were that the risk 
associated with masked hypertension was consistently lower than sustained 
hypertension, and that white-coat hypertension, diagnosed by HBPM, was associ-
ated with an adverse outcome. Given that the threshold levels for both office and 
home BP were in line with previous report, the authors suggested that part of the 
risk associated with white- coat hypertension was related to relatively higher lev-
els of home BP (although in the range of normality) in this category as compared 
to normotensives.
Similar results were found in the Dallas Heart Study: after a median follow-up of 
9 years, the risk associated with masked hypertension for developing adverse CV 
outcomes was significantly higher than normotensive, and also comparable to the 
risk observed in the population of individuals with white-coat hypertension (HR 
2.03 and HR 2.09, respectively) [10].
In a meta-analysis enrolling 13,526 patients from 8 studies, masked hypertension 
was confirmed to be associated with worse CV prognosis, both if evaluated through 
ABPM (HR 2.0, 95% C.I. 1.54–2.60) and through HBPM (HR 2.13, 95% C.I. 1.35–
3.35, Fig.  32.6) [9]. At present, however, there are no convincing evidences support-
ing the prognostic superiority of masked hypertension as diagnosed by ambulatory 
24 h or home BP.
Masked hypertension was associated with a worse CV outcome even among 
diabetic subjects and among patients with chronic kidney disease. In a subpopula-
tion of 229 untreated diabetics from the IDACO study, the risk of CV events asso-
ciated with masked hypertension tended to be higher than the risk associated with 
normotension (HR 1.96, p = 0.059), and was on the same degree of the risk associ-
ated with grade-1 hypertensives (HR 1.07, p  = 0.82) [37]. In a group of 588 patients 
with non-dialysis chronic kidney disease undergoing office and 24 h BP evalua-
tion, individuals with masked hypertension (20.6% of the entire cohort) showed 
increased risk of cardiac and cerebrovascular events, total mortality and renal 
events, although the relative low sample size is a limitation to the generalizability 
of results [39].32 Role of Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension486
32.7  Treatment Strategies in Prehypertension  
with Masked Hypertension
We previously speculated that subjects with masked hypertension are at increased 
risk of developing intermediate target organ damage and overt cardiovascular 
events. From a theoretical standpoint, individuals with masked hypertension might 
benefit from an effective pharmacologic antihypertensive approach aimed at reduc-
ing the increased BP load. Moreover, subjects with masked hypertension are often 
exposed to additional cardiovascular risk due to the increased prevalence, within 
their clinical phenotype, of diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and obstructive sleep 
apnoea. Therefore, the optimal strategy for CV risk reduction should take into 
account the effective management of concomitant conditions.
Unluckily, to date there is no substantive evidence, either on intermediate out-
comes or on hard endpoints, supporting the efficacy of drug treatment for masked 
hypertension. Moreover, there is no demonstration that drug treatment in patients 
with masked hypertension will provide a relative risk reduction consistent with that 
observed in subjects with sustained hypertension. Despite reasons supporting treat-
ment of masked hypertension appear rational, it should be remembered that masked Study
Ambulatory blood pressure
Bjorklund et al.           2003
Fagard et al.           2005
Hansen et al.           2006
Ohkubo et al.             2005
Mancia et al.              2006
Bobrie et al.              2004
Mancia et al.              2006
0.5 1 2.5 51 0Pierdomenico et al.           2006
Self-measured blood pressureSubtotal (I2 = 0.0%, P = 0.762)
Subtotal (I2 = 0.0%, P = 0.813)
Overall (I2 = 0.0%, P = 0.911)YearAdjusted
hazard ratio (95% CI)
2.77 (1.15, 6.68)
1.51 (0.58, 3.94)
1.52 (0.91, 2.54)
2.13 (1.38, 3.29)
2.75 (1.07, 7.09)
2.28 (1.10, 4.71)
2.00 (1.54, 2.60)
2.06 (1.22, 3.47)
2.34 (0.94, 5.85)
2.13 (1.35, 3.35)z = 5.18   P < 0.001
z = 6.11   P < 0.001z = 3.26   P = 0.001
2.03 (1.62, 2.55)
Fig. 32.6 Overview of longitudinal studies addressing the prognostic impact of masked hyperten-
sion diagnosed by ABPM and HBPM. See the text for details
G. Pucci et al.487
hypertension is a poorly reproducible condition. Therefore the risk of overdiagnosis 
and overtreatment should be thoroughly considered and monitored. Another issue 
fuelling the controversy on how this condition should be diagnosed and managed 
depends on whether the definition should be based on home or 24 h BP, daytime or 
night-time (or both) BP thresholds. This is another “grey area” in urgent need of 
sound evidence.
The European Guidelines for the Management of arterial hypertension add more 
uncertainty to the field, since the recommendation to treat subjects with masked 
hypertension with both lifestyle measures and antihypertensive drugs has been 
reported with the class of recommendation IIa (Weight of evidence/opinion in 
favour of usefulness/efficacy) and the lowest level of evidence (grade C, corre-
sponding to expert opinion and result from small studies or registries) [61].
There are at least two planned prospective studies aiming to provide definitive 
answers to these questions. The first trial, which is named “MASked and masked-  
unconTrolled hypERtension managed based on office BP or out-of-office BP 
measurements” (MASTER) Study, is a prospective, randomized, blinded-end-
point (PROBE design) study, which will randomize participants to an office 
BP-guided treatment or to an ABPM- or Home BP-guided treatment (registered 
at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT02804074). The study will explore if tailoring of anti-
hypertensive treatment based on office or out-of-office BP will be associated 
with a different incidence in intermediate outcomes, including cardiovascular 
and renal endpoints (LV mass and albumin/creatinine ratio) at 1 year, a different 
occurrence in cardiovascular events during a period of 4 years, and changes in a 
number of BP-related variables through the study. The planned sample size of 
study is set at 1240 subjects to be recruited in 30 centres, taking into account a 
dropout rate of 15%.
A second study with similar aim will assess whether antihypertensive treatment 
in masked hypertension will be associated with a conversion to the controlled 
hypertension category. The study also aims to explore the effect of drug treatment 
of masked hypertension on the occurrence of target organ damage, such as left ven-
tricular hypertrophy and proteinuria (registered at clinicaltrials.gov as 
NCT02142881). The study is planned to collect data for the primary outcome mea-
sure by December 2018.
 Conclusions
The need for an out-of-office evaluation in patients with prehypertension is justi-
fied by the likelihood to detect masked hypertension, a condition characterized 
by sustained increased BP load and a higher probability of target organ damage. 
Masked hypertension is frequent among prehypertensive subjects, and its preva-
lence increases with office BP. A clinical phenotype characterized by male gen-
der, increased BP response to physical and mental stressors, obesity, diabetes, 
metabolic syndrome, smoking, and obstructive sleep apnoea is often associated 
with masked hypertension. In these subjects, an out-of-office BP evaluation can 
be justified.32 Role of Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension488
The prevalence and reproducibility of masked hypertension is critically 
dependent from the cut-off BP levels adopted for the diagnosis. At present, there 
are at least four BP combinations (daytime BP, night-time BP, 24 h BP and home 
BP) proposed for the diagnosis of masked hypertension. Longitudinal outcome 
studies are needed to compare of the specific prognostic implications of each of 
these categories.
There is general consensus that subjects with masked hypertension and 
patients with sustained hypertension share a similar relative risk of CV events. 
This holds for Grade I hypertension confirmed at the out-of-office BP evaluation. 
Studies relying on home-BP measurement for the diagnosis of masked hyperten-
sion are consistent. There is urgent need of ad hoc designed prospective studies 
to ascertain the hypothesized beneficial effects of treating masked hypertension 
with lifestyle intervention measures and/or antihypertensive medications.
References
 1. The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, 
and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. National High Blood Pressure Education Program. 
Bethesda (MD): National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (US); 2004 Aug. Report No.: 
04-5230.
 2. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, Kannel WB, Levy D. Assessment of frequency of progres-
sion to hypertension in non-hypertensive participants in the Framingham heart study: a cohort 
study. Lancet. 2001;358:1682–6.
 3. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, Peto R.  Collins R; prospective studies collaboration. 
Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of indi-
vidual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360:1903–13.
 4. van der Steen MS, Lenders JW, Graafsma SJ, den Arend J, Thien T. Reproducibility of ambula-
tory blood pressure monitoring in daily practice. J Hum Hypertens. 1999;13:303–8.
 5. Hara A, Tanaka K, Ohkubo T, et al. Ambulatory versus home versus clinic blood pressure: 
the association with subclinical cerebrovascular diseases: the Ohasama study. Hypertension. 
2012;59:22–8.
 6. O’Brien E, Atkins N, Stergiou G, Karpettas N, Parati G, Asmar R, et al. European Society 
of Hypertension Working Group on blood pressure monitoring. Practice guidelines of the 
European Society of Hypertension for clinic, ambulatory and self blood pressure measure-
ment. J Hypertens. 2005;23:697–701.
 7. Hansen TW, Kikuya M, Thijs L, Bjorklund-Bodega K, Kuznetsova T, Ohkubo T, et  al. 
Prognostic superiority of daytime ambulatory over conventional blood pressure in four popu-
lations: a meta-analysis of 7,030 individuals. J Hypertens. 2007;25:1554–64.
 8. Verdecchia P, Porcellati C, Schillaci G, Borgioni C, Ciucci A, Battistelli M, Guerrieri M, 
Gatteschi C, Zampi I, Santucci A, Santucci C, Reboldi G. Ambulatory blood pressure. An 
independent predictor of prognosis in essential hypertension. Hypertension. 1994;24:793–801.
 9. Angeli F, Reboldi G, Verdecchia P. Masked hypertension: evaluation, prognosis, and treat-
ment. Am J Hypertens. 2010;23:941–8.
 10. Tientcheu D, Ayers C, Das SR, McGuire DK, de Lemos JA, Khera A, Kaplan N, Victor R, 
V ongpatanasin W.  Target organ complications and cardiovascular events associated with 
masked hypertension and white-coat hypertension: analysis from the Dallas heart study. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:2159–69.
 11. Barnett AG, van der Pols JC, Dobson AJ. Regression to the mean: what it is and how to deal 
with it. Int J Epidemiol. 2005;34:215–20.
G. Pucci et al.489
 12. Schwartz JE, Burg MM, Shimbo D, Broderick JE, Stone AA, Ishikawa J, Sloan R, Yurgel T, 
Grossman S, Pickering TG. Clinic blood pressure underestimates ambulatory blood pressure 
in an untreated employer-based US population: results from the masked hypertension study. 
Circulation. 2016;134:1794–807.
 13. Kikuya M, Hansen TW, Thijs L, Bjorklund-Bodegaard K, Kuznetsova T, Ohkubo T, et  al. 
International database on ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in relation to cardiovascular 
outcomes investigators. Diagnostic thresholds for ambulatory blood pressure monitoring based 
on 10-year cardiovascular risk. Circulation. 2007;24:2145–52.
 14. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE). Hypertension. The clinical man-
agement of primary hypertension in adults. Clinical Guideline. 2011;127. www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/CG127.
 15. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, et al., Joint National 
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; National High Blood Pressure Education Program 
Coordinating Committee. Seventh report of the Joint National Committee on prevention, 
detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood pressure. Hypertension. 2003;42:1206–52.
 16. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redon J, Zanchetti A, Bohm M, et al. The Task Force for 
the management of arterial hypertension of the European Hypertension Society (ESH) and of 
the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). 2013 ESH/ESC Guidelines for the management of 
arterial hypertension. J Hypertens. 2013;22:193–278.
 17. Diaz KM, Veerabhadrappa P, Brown MD, Whited MC, Dubbert PM, Hickson DA. Prevalence, 
determinants, and clinical significance of masked hypertension in a population-based sample 
of African Americans: The Jackson Heart Study. Am J Hypertens. 2015;28:900–8.
 18. Shimbo D, Newman JD, Schwartz JE. Masked hypertension and prehypertension: diagnostic 
overlap and interrelationships with left ventricular mass: the masked hypertension study. Am J 
Hypertens. 2012;25:664–71.
 19. Wang YC, Shimbo D, Muntner P, Moran AE, Krakoff LR, Schwartz JE. Prevalence of masked 
hypertension among US adults with nonelevated clinic blood pressure. Am J Epidemiol. 
2017;185:194–202.
 20. Asayama K, Thijs L, Brguljan-Hitij J, Niiranen TJ, Hozawa A, Boggia J, Aparicio LS, Hara 
A, Johansson JK, Ohkubo T, Tzourio C, Stergiou GS, Sandoya E, Tsuji I, Jula AM, Imai Y , 
Staessen JA. Risk stratification by self-measured home blood pressure across categories of 
conventional blood pressure: a participant-level meta-analysis. PLoS Med. 2014;11:e1001591.
 21. Mancia G, Parati G. Office compared with ambulatory blood pressure in assessing response to 
antihypertensive treatment: a meta-analysis. J Hypertens. 2004;22:435–45.
 22. Banegas JR, Ruilope LM, de la Sierra A, de la Cruz JJ, Gorostidi M, Segura J, Martell N, 
García-Puig J, Deanfield J, Williams B. High prevalence of masked uncontrolled hypertension 
in people with treated hypertension. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:3304–12.
 23. Ben-Dov IZ, Ben-Arie L, Mekler J, Bursztyn M. In clinical practice, masked hypertension is 
as common as isolated clinic hypertension: predominance of younger men. Am J Hypertens. 
2005;18:589–93.
 24. Bobrie G, Clerson P, Cuchet A, Mahmoudi A, Postel-Vinay N, Chatellier G.  Prevalence 
and mechanism of masked hypertension: the ol’mesures survey. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 
2006;99:760–3.
 25. de la Sierra A, Vinyoles E, Banegas JR, Parati G, de la Cruz JJ, Gorostidi M, Segura J, Ruilope 
LM. Short-term and long-term reproducibility of hypertension phenotypes obtained by office 
and ambulatory blood pressure measurements. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2016;18:927–33.
 26. Lovibond K, Jowett S, Barton P, Caulfield M, Heneghan C, Hobbs FD, Hodgkinson J, Mant J, 
Martin U, Williams B, Wonderling D, McManus RJ. Cost-effectiveness of options for the diag-
nosis of high blood pressure in primary care: a modelling study. Lancet. 2011;378:1219–30.
 27. Leary AC, Donnan PT, MacDonald TM, Murphy MB. The influence of physical activity on the 
variability of ambulatory blood pressure. Am J Hypertens. 2000;13:1067–73.
 28. Schultz MG, Hare JL, Marwick TH, Stowasser M, Sharman JE.  Masked hypertension is 
“unmasked” by low-intensity exercise blood pressure. Blood Press. 2011;20:284–9.32 Role of Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension490
 29. Trudel X, Brisson C, Milot A.  Job strain and masked hypertension. Psychosom Med. 
2010;72:786–93.
 30. Seki M, Inoue R, Ohkubo T, Kikuya M, Hara A, Metoki H, Hirose T, Tsubota-Utsugi M, 
Asayama K, Kanno A, Obara T, Hoshi H, Totsune K, Satoh H, Imai Y . Association of environ-
mental tobacco smoke exposure with elevated home blood pressure in Japanese women: the 
Ohasama study. J Hypertens. 2010;28:1814–20.
 31. Ohira T, Tanigawa T, Tabata M, Imano H, Kitamura A, Kiyama M, Sato S, Okamura T, Cui R, 
Koike KA, Shimamoto T, Iso H. Effects of habitual alcohol intake on ambulatory blood pres-
sure, heart rate, and its variability among Japanese men. Hypertension. 2009;53:13–9.
 32. Hänninen MR, Niiranen TJ, Puukka PJ, Jula AM. Metabolic risk factors and masked hyperten-
sion in the general population: the Finn-Home study. J Hum Hypertens. 2014;28:421–6.
 33. Baguet JP, Lévy P, Barone-Rochette G, Tamisier R, Pierre H, Peeters M, Mallion JM, Pépin 
JL.  Masked hypertension in obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. J Hypertens. 2008;26: 
885–92.
 34. Drager LF, Diegues-Silva L, Diniz PM, Bortolotto LA, Pedrosa RP, Couto RB, Marcondes B, 
Giorgi DM, Lorenzi-Filho G, Krieger EM. Obstructive sleep apnea, masked hypertension, and 
arterial stiffness in men. Am J Hypertens. 2010;23:249–54.
 35. Lee S, Thomas RJ, Kim H, Seo HS, Baik I, Yoon DW, Kim SJ, Lee SK, Shin C. Association 
between high nocturnal blood pressure and white matter change and its interaction by obstruc-
tive sleep apnoea among normotensive adults. J Hypertens. 2014;32:2005–12.
 36. Erdem F, Cakır U, Yıldırım O, Alcelik A, Donmez I, Tuman TC, Caglar SO, Erdem A, Yazıcı 
M. A new diagnostic tool for masked hypertension: impaired sleep quality. Arch Med Sci. 
2016;12:1207–13.
 37. Franklin SS, Thijs L, Li Y , Hansen TW, Boggia J, Liu Y , Asayama K, Björklund-Bodegård 
K, Ohkubo T, Jeppesen J, Torp-Pedersen C, Dolan E, Kuznetsova T, Stolarz-Skrzypek K, 
Tikhonoff V , Malyutina S, Casiglia E, Nikitin Y , Lind L, Sandoya E, Kawecka-Jaszcz K, 
Filipovsky J, Imai Y , Wang J, Ibsen H, O’Brien E, Staessen JA. Masked hypertension in diabe-
tes mellitus: treatment implications for clinical practice. Hypertension. 2013;61:964–71.
 38. Tang H, Gong WY , Zhang QZ, Zhang J, Ye ZC, Peng H, Wang C, Lou T. Prevalence, deter -
minants, and clinical significance of masked hypertension and white-coat hypertension in 
patients with chronic kidney disease. Nephrology (Carlton). 2016;21:841–50.
 39. Wang C, Zhang J, Li Y , Ma X, Ye Z, Peng H, Lou T. Masked hypertension, rather than white- 
coat hypertension, has a prognostic role in patients with non-dialysis chronic kidney disease. 
Int J Cardiol. 2017;230:33–9.
 40. Bangash F, Agarwal R. Masked hypertension and white-coat hypertension in chronic kidney 
disease: a meta-analysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009;4:656–64.
 41. Sheppard JP, Fletcher B, Gill P, Martin U, Roberts N, McManus RJ. Predictors of the home- 
clinic blood pressure difference: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Hypertens. 
2016;29:614–25.
 42. Dolan E, Stanton A, Thijs L, Hinedi K, Atkins N, McClory S, Den Hond E, McCormack P, 
Staessen JA, O’Brien E. Superiority of ambulatory over clinic blood pressure measurement in 
predicting mortality: the Dublin outcome study. Hypertension. 2005;46:156–61.
 43. Liu JE, Roman MJ, Pini R, Schwartz JE, Pickering TG, Devereux RB. Cardiac and arterial 
target organ damage in adults with elevated ambulatory and normal office blood pressure. Ann 
Intern Med. 1999;131:564–72.
 44. Cuspidi C, Sala C, Tadic M, Rescaldani M, De Giorgi GA, Grassi G, Mancia G. Untreated 
masked hypertension and carotid atherosclerosis: a meta-analysis. Blood Press. 2015;24: 
65–71.
 45. Oe Y , Shimbo D, Ishikawa J, Okajima K, Hasegawa T, Diaz KM, Muntner P, Homma S, 
Schwartz JE.  Alterations in diastolic function in masked hypertension: findings from the 
masked hypertension study. Am J Hypertens. 2013;26:808–15.
 46. Komori T, Eguchi K, Kabutoya T, Ishikawa J, Hoshide S, Kario K. Left ventricular diastolic 
function evaluated by the E/e’ ratio is impaired in patients with masked uncontrolled hyperten-
sion. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2014;36:538–44.
G. Pucci et al.491
 47. Marchesi C, Maresca AM, Solbiati F, Franzetti I, Laurita E, Nicolini E, Gianni M, Guasti L, 
Marnini P, Venco A, Grandi AM. Masked hypertension in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Relationship 
with left-ventricular structure and function. Am J Hypertens. 2007;20:1079–84.
 48. Sega R, Trocino G, Lanzarotti A, Carugo S, Cesana G, Schiavina R, Valagussa F, Bombelli 
M, Giannattasio C, Zanchetti A, Mancia G. Alterations of cardiac structure in patients with 
isolated office, ambulatory, or home hypertension: data from the general population (Pressione 
Arteriose Monitorate E Loro Associazioni [PAMELA] Study). Circulation. 2001;104:1385–92.
 49. Hänninen MR, Niiranen TJ, Puukka PJ, Kesäniemi YA, Kähönen M, Jula AM. Target organ 
damage and masked hypertension in the general population: the Finn-Home study. J Hypertens. 
2013;31:1136–43.
 50. Fukuhara M, Arima H, Ninomiya T, Hata J, Hirakawa Y , Doi Y , Yonemoto K, Mukai N, Nagata 
M, Ikeda F, Matsumura K, Kitazono T, Kiyohara Y . White-coat and masked hypertension are 
associated with carotid atherosclerosis in a general population: the Hisayama study. Stroke. 
2013;44:1512–7.
 51. Manios E, Michas F, Tsivgoulis G, Stamatelopoulos K, Tsagalis G, Koroboki E, Alexaki 
E, Papamichael C, Vemmos K, Zakopoulos N. Impact of prehypertension on carotid artery 
intima-media thickening: actual or masked? Atherosclerosis. 2011;214:215–9.
 52. Redmond N, Booth JN 3rd, Tanner RM, Diaz KM, Abdalla M, Sims M, Muntner P, Shimbo 
D.  Prevalence of masked hypertension and its association with subclinical cardiovascu-
lar disease in African Americans: results from the Jackson Heart Study. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2016;5:e002284.
 53. Schillaci G, Pucci G, Pirro M, Settimi L, Hijazi R, Franklin SS, Mannarino E.  Combined 
effects of office and 24-h blood pressure on aortic stiffness in human hypertension. J Hypertens. 
2011;29:869–75.
 54. Wijkman M, Länne T, Engvall J, Lindström T, Ostgren CJ, Nystrom FH. Masked nocturnal 
hypertension--a novel marker of risk in type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia. 2009;52(7):1258–64. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-009-1369-9. Epub 2009 Apr 25
 55. Scuteri A, Morrell CH, Orru’ M, AlGhatrif M, Saba PS, Terracciano A, Ferreli LA, Loi F, 
Marongiu M, Pilia MG, Delitala A, Tarasov KV , Schlessinger D, Ganau A, Cucca F, Lakatta 
EG. Gender specific profiles of white coat and masked hypertension impacts on arterial struc-
ture and function in the SardiNIA study. Int J Cardiol. 2016;217:92–8.
 56. Verdecchia P, Reboldi G, Porcellati C, Schillaci G, Pede S, Bentivoglio M, Angeli F, Norgiolini 
S, Ambrosio G. Risk of cardiovascular disease in relation to achieved office and ambulatory 
blood pressure control in treated hypertensive subjects. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;39:878–85.
 57. Björklund K, Lind L, Zethelius B, Andrén B, Lithell H.  Isolated ambulatory hypertension 
predicts cardiovascular morbidity in elderly men. Circulation. 2003;107:1297–302.
 58. Ohkubo T, Kikuya M, Metoki H, Asayama K, Obara T, Hashimoto J, Totsune K, Hoshi H, 
Satoh H, Imai Y . Prognosis of “masked” hypertension and “white-coat” hypertension detected 
by 24-h ambulatory blood pressure monitoring 10-year follow-up from the Ohasama study. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:508–15.
 59. Bobrie G, Chatellier G, Genes N, Clerson P, Vaur L, Vaisse B, Menard J, Mallion 
JM.  Cardiovascular prognosis of “masked hypertension” detected by blood pressure self- 
measurement in elderly treated hypertensive patients. JAMA. 2004;291:1342–9.
 60. Kario K, Saito I, Kushiro T, Teramukai S, Ishikawa Y , Mori Y , Kobayashi F, Shimada K. Home 
blood pressure and cardiovascular outcomes in patients during antihypertensive therapy: 
primary results of HONEST, a large-scale prospective, real-world observational study. 
Hypertension. 2014;64:989–96.
 61. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redón J, Zanchetti A, Böhm M, Christiaens T, Cifkova 
R, De Backer G, Dominiczak A, Galderisi M, Grobbee DE, Jaarsma T, Kirchhof P, Kjeldsen 
SE, Laurent S, Manolis AJ, Nilsson PM, Ruilope LM, Schmieder RE, Sirnes PA, Sleight P, 
Viigimaa M, Waeber B, Zannad F. 2013 ESH/ESC Guidelines for the management of arte-
rial hypertension: the task force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European 
Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). J Hypertens. 
2013;31:1281–357.32 Role of Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring in Prehypertension493 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_33
A. Flaa 
Department of Cardiology, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevaal, Oslo, Norway 
Section of Cardiovascular and Renal Research, Medical Clinic,  
Oslo University Hospital, Ullevaal, Oslo, Norway 
M. Rostrup 
Section of Cardiovascular and Renal Research, Medical Clinic,  
Oslo University Hospital, Ullevaal, Oslo, Norway 
Department of Acute Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevaal, Oslo, Norway 
Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway 
S. E. Kjeldsen ( *) 
Department of Cardiology, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevaal, Oslo, Norway 
Section of Cardiovascular and Renal Research, Medical Clinic,  
Oslo University Hospital, Ullevaal, Oslo, Norway 
Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
e-mail: s.e.kjeldsen@medisin.uio.no; sverrkj@online.no 
I. Eide 
Section of Cardiovascular and Renal Research, Medical Clinic,  
Oslo University Hospital, Ullevaal, Oslo, Norway 
Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Department of Nephrology, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevaal, Oslo, Norway 33Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress 
as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk 
Factors
Arnljot Flaa, Morten Rostrup, Sverre E. Kjeldsen, 
and Ivar Eide
33.1  Introduction
Hypertension is an independent cardiovascular risk factor, but is also strongly 
associated with other risk factors like obesity, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia. 
We have for many years focused on the pathophysiology underlying these conditions 
in young, healthy subjects with special attention to the sympathoadrenal system. 494
Since the 1980s we have selected young men according to their blood pressure at the 
military draft screening for laboratory examinations, and have demonstrated an 
association between blood pressure and hyperreactivity to mental stress (intense 
arithmetical calculations) [1]. Moreover, the apparently consistent covariation 
between sympathoadrenal activity on one side and total cholesterol, high density 
lipoprotein (HDL), insulin resistance, left ventricle mass, and platelet activation on 
the other [2, 3] lead to the interest in sympathoadrenal hyperreactivity to mental 
stress as a possible important predictor of future cardiovascular risk factors.
33.1.1  The Sympathoadrenal System
The autonomic nervous system regulates body functions in general without our con-
sciousness, and its main goal is to maintain homeostasis in the body. It consists of the 
sympathoadrenal and parasympathetic nervous system. The central regulation of the 
autonomic nervous system is extremely complex, where the hypothalamus acts as a 
control center. It receives afferent signals from the body in addition to stimulation 
from the limbic system and the cortex. The efferent signals are mediated direct and 
indirect to the preganglionic neurons. These preganglionic axons leave the central 
nervous system via cranial nerves or ventral roots to synapse in specialized ganglia 
with the postganglionic nerves that innervate the target organs. Most organs are regu-
lated by both systems, and they are mainly regulated in a reciprocal manner [4 ].
The peripheral sympathetic nervous system originates in the spinal cord at the 
level of T1-L2, where the preganglionic neurons are located in the intermediolateral 
cell column (see Fig.  33.1). These preganglionic nerves travel a short distance and 
enter the sympathetic ganglia, mainly arranged in two chains located alongside the 
vertebral bodies. The sympathetic ganglionic chains extend from the cervical to the 
sacral region, and the short preganglionic nerves enter the chain and make a synapse 
with the postganglionic nerves, which reach the effector organs. Some pregangli-
onic fibers do not synapse in the sympathetic chains but terminate in separate cervi-
cal or abdominal ganglia, and some even synapse directly with chromaffin cells in 
the adrenal medulla [5].
The sympathetic postganglionic nerves are widely distributed in the blood vessel 
walls and in most organs, especially the heart, spleen, and salivary glands. 
Sympathetic activation increases the heart rate, cardiac output, and blood pressure, 
and redistributes the blood by constricting or dilating arterioles in the skin, splanch-
nic organs, and skeletal muscle. Moreover, pupils are widened, bronchi are dilated, 
and sphincters constricted. Metabolic changes include mobilization of fat and gly-
cogen [5]. The effect may be highly differentiated. Preganglionic activation of the 
adrenal medulla, on the other hand, leads to secretion of adrenaline and noradrena-
line into the circulation, thus producing a far-reaching hormonal effect instead of 
the local effect made by the sympathetic nerves [4].
The catecholamines act predominantly on adrenergic receptors, located in the 
membrane of the effector cells. The different effects of the various catecholamines 
on the heart and smooth muscle cells are caused by different types of adrenoceptors, 
A. Flaa et al.495
of which there are two groups, the α- and the β-receptors, and at least five different 
subtypes [5]:
• α1-Adrenoceptor is located in smooth muscle, particularly in blood vessels in the 
skin and the gastrointestinal system. The principal effect of stimulation of these 
receptors in blood vessels is vasoconstriction.
• α2-Adrenoceptor is a pre- and postsynaptic receptor, and mediates synaptic 
transmission.
• β1-Adrenoceptor stimulation in the heart increases the contractility and heart 
rate, while stimulation of these receptors in the juxtaglomerular cells in the kid-
neys results in renin release, augmenting the conversion of angiotensin II.
• β2-Adrenoceptors are mainly situated in the vascular and bronchial smooth mus-
cles, where agonists dilate the vessels and bronchi.
• β3-Adrenoceptors mediate lipolytic and thermic responses in brown and white 
adipose tissue [6]. In the heart, they are believed to have the opposite effect to the 
other β-adrenoceptors, and their negative inotropic effects might play a role as a 
“safety-valve” during intense adrenergic stimulation. In vessels, they mediate 
vasodilatation [7].
We use the term “sympathoadrenal system” and not “sympathetic system” to 
emphasize the fact that the sympathoadrenal system consists of two different ele-
ments which not necessarily act as a unit [8]. Due to the highly differentiated activ-
ity in different parts of the sympathetic system, activity in the adrenal medulla may 
Posterior root
Intermedio-
lateral hornSpinal nerve
White ramus
Gray ramus
Sympathetic chain
Anterior root
Preganglionic
nerve fiber
Peripheral ganglion
Postganglionic nerve
fibers
Effector endingsPilorector
muscleEye
Heart
Bronchi
Celiac ganglion
Pylorus
Adrenal
medulla
Kidney 
Ureter
Intestine
Ileocecal
valve
Anal sphincter
Urinary bladderSweat
gland
Blood
vesselT-1
Hypogastric plexus12
L-1
5
58
Sensory endings
Target organ
Fig. 33.1 The sympathetic nervous system33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors496
show reciprocal alterations compared to measurements of overall sympathetic activ-
ity, even though medullary activity is stimulated by preganglionic sympathetic 
nerves. The sympathoadrenal system is probably most known for the ability to pre-
pare the body for fear, flight, and fight situations, but it also participates in several 
other settings like cold exposure, eating, standing up, sexual activity, and pain. 
These different settings involve differentiated patterns of sympathoadrenal activity. 
Still, we use the expression “sympathoadrenal activity” although it is not a strictly 
defined term.
33.1.2  Sympathoadrenal Activity and Development 
of Cardiovascular Disease
The first report suggesting an association between transient tachycardia and devel-
opment of hypertension was published in 1945 [9]. Levy et al. followed 22,741 US 
army officers from 1 to more than 25 years and found that subjects with a heart rate 
of 100 beats per minute or above had increased risk of developing sustained hyper -
tension. Likewise, they found that sustained hypertension developed more fre-
quently in those with previous transient hypertension than in those who never 
showed an elevation of blood pressure [10]. Although heart rate is dependent on 
both parasympathetic and sympathoadrenal activity, there are close correlations 
between heart rate and indices of sympathetic activity like electric activity in sym-
pathetic fibers and noradrenaline plasma concentrations [11], and these early reports 
indicated that increased sympathoadrenal reactivity could be a causal factor in 
hypertension.
The sympathoadrenal system affects the function of nearly all the internal organs 
of the body and represents an important tool for the central nervous system to main-
tain homeostasis during acute and chronic changes in the physiological state [12]. 
However, chronic inappropriate activations over time are thought to initiate and 
accelerate cardiovascular disease [13]. The simplified overview in Fig.  33.2 illus-
trates the complex relations between sympathoadrenal activity and development of 
cardiovascular disease.
The metabolic syndrome is a clustering of risk factors linked to cardiovascular 
morbidity and mortality [14], and there is a positive relationship between the cardio-
vascular risk and the number of components of the metabolic syndrome that is pres-
ent [15]. There are several definitions of the metabolic syndrome, but the usual risk 
factors included in the definitions are visceral obesity (increased waist circumfer -
ence), elevated triglycerides, reduced HDL, insulin resistance, and high blood pres-
sure [16, 17]. One theory is that lipolysis in excessive visceral adipose tissue 
accompanying obesity is the key feature of the metabolic syndrome. Other possible 
underlying mechanisms behind the syndrome are insulin resistance, atherogenic dys-
lipidemia, and chronic low grade inflammation [18– 20]. There seems to be, however, 
consensus that insulin resistance is perhaps the most important pathophysiological 
feature of the metabolic syndrome, leading to increased secretion of insulin and 
hyperinsulinemia, which may account for all the changes in the metabolic syndrome 
A. Flaa et al.497
[15]. Then the question arises: “What causes insulin resistance?” Data indicate that 
sympathoadrenal hyperactivity may in fact constitute the “core” of the metabolic 
syndrome, and the above mechanisms may be explained by a common pathogenic 
background in the sympathoadrenal system (Fig.  33.3) [21, 22]. This hypothesis is 
based on three findings [15]:
 1. Sympathetic activity reduces insulin sensitivity, probably through hemodynamic 
and possibly cellular effects.
 2. Several components of the metabolic syndrome are accompanied by increased 
activity in the sympathoadrenal system.
 3. Sympathoadrenal activity is able, directly or indirectly, to favor the development 
and progression of organ damage associated with the metabolic syndrome.
33.1.2.1  Sympathoadrenal Activity and Hypertension
There is much uncertainty about the pathophysiology of essential hypertension, and 
there are probably a large number of factors contributing to the elevated blood pres-
sure [23]. One possible cause may be alterations in the autonomic nervous system, 
which plays an important role in the normal physiological regulation of pressure.
Several cross-sectional studies demonstrate increased sympathetic activity 
among hypertensives compared to normotensives [24–27], and about 30% of young K+ sequestration ↓β-adrenergic
sensitivity 
↓Na+
excretionVaso-
constr ictionINCREASED SYMPATHOADRENAL ACTIVITY
↑Hear t
rate
↑Renin
release↑Strok e
volume
↑Blood
volume
Cardiac
hypertroph yHyper tension
Thrombosis
and strok eAtherosclerosis
and coronar y
heart diseaseDiabetes Arrhytmias↑Hematocr it
and b lood
viscosity
↑Peripheral
resistance↑Cardiac
outputTrophic
action
Weight
gain*
Insulin
resistanceHypokalemia↑Platelet
aggregation 
Ion channel
regulation 
Inter mediate
conditions
End-organ
diseaseDyslipidemia
Fig. 33.2 Effects of increased sympathoadrenal activity. * While increased sympathetic activity 
may reduce adrenergic sensitivity and thereby increase body weight, there are also reports suggest-
ing a negative relationship between sympathoadrenal activity and weight gain in longitudinal 
studies33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors498
subjects with borderline hypertension have a hyperkinetic circulation with tachycar -
dia, high cardiac output and elevated noradrenaline levels in plasma, while the total 
peripheral resistance is fairly normal [28, 29]. Data indicate that some of the sym-
pathoadrenal activation in young hypertensives may be due to the awareness of 
hypertension [30–32]. These subjects differ from older patients with established 
hypertension, who show a hemodynamic pattern characterized by normalization of 
the cardiac output and an elevated total peripheral resistance [29]. In other words, 
there seems to be a hemodynamic transition from a hyperkinetic state to increased 
total peripheral resistance. There are at least two main hypotheses behind this find-
ing. The theory of autoregulation proposes that increased intravascular volume and 
increased cardiac output will lead to an over-perfusion, exceeding the metabolic 
needs of the tissues. To maintain normal perfusion, the total vascular resistance 
would increase [33]. Julius, however, claims there is no evidence of volume expan-
sion in hyperkinetic hypertension [28]. Furthermore, the cardiac output does prob-
ably not exceed the metabolic need. As data indicate that increased sympathetic 
activity may reduce chronotropic and inotropic β-adrenergic responsiveness, he 
therefore suggests that the responsiveness in the heart decreases, involving down-
regulation of β-adrenergic receptors, while in the vascular beds the responsiveness 
increases during the course of hypertension, due to structural changes in the arterio-
lar wall described by Folkow [34]. This could lead to the observed normalization of 
cardiac output accompanied by increase of vascular resistance (Figs.  33.4 and 33.5).
The reason why activity in the sympathetic nervous system eventually decreases 
with age is not known, but one possible explanation could be that as total peripheral 
resistance increases due to structural changes, less sympathetic activity is needed to 
maintain a certain level of blood pressure [35].
As most of the studies on sympathoadrenal activity and hypertension have been 
cross-sectional, the data do not allow any causal conclusions. There are only a few ?
Metabolic syndromeAtherogenic
dyslipidemiaVisceral
obesityInflammationSympathoadrenal
overactivity
Insulin
resistance
Hypertension?Fig. 33.3 Possible 
pathogenic mechanisms of 
the metabolic syndrome
A. Flaa et al.499
140
120
100Mean blood pressure (mmHg)80
60
40
Screening99thBlood pressure response according
to screening percentile (n=44)
50th******
***
1st
Laboratory
15 minutes
Rostrup M et al. Hyper tension 1993;22:891–9.Laboratory
30 minutes
Fig. 33.4 Blood pressures in young men from 1st, 50th, and 99th percentiles at screening, seated 
in the laboratory for 15 min and resting supine in the laboratory for 30 min prior to stress testing
50∆SBPmmHg ∆DBPmmHgBlood Pressure Responses to Mental Stress
(19-year-old men)
Rostrup M, Westheim A, Kjeldsen SE, Eide I. Hyper tension, 1993;22:891-895.∆HR beats/min
p<0.025p<0.005p<0.01
40
30
20
10
0
1st
(n=15)50th
(n=15)99th
(n=14)1st
(n=15)50th
(n=15)99th
(n=14)1st
(n=15)50th
(n=15)99th
(n=14)50
40
30
20
10
050
40
30
20
10
0
Fig. 33.5 Blood pressure and heart rate responses to mental stress test in young men from 1st, 
50th, and 99th percentiles33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors500
available prospective longitudinal studies assessing the predictive power. Bohm 
et al. found higher resting noradrenaline concentration at rest in subjects who devel-
oped hypertension, compared to those who remained normotensive or borderline 
hypertensive [36]. Another study found that mental stress-induced blood pressure 
responses together with plasma noradrenaline response to bicycle ergometry and 
psychological factors were relatively weak predictors of future blood pressure clas-
sification over 2.5 years [37]. Finally, Masuo et al. demonstrated that resting nor -
adrenaline concentration was a predictor of mean blood pressure increase over 5 
years in Japanese subjects [38].
33.1.2.2  Sympathoadrenal Activity and Obesity
Genetic factors may account for 25–40% of the variability in human body weight 
[39], and the sympathoadrenal system and β-adrenergic receptors are thought to 
play an important role [40–42]. However, whether alterations in the sympathoadre-
nal system contribute to obesity or, rather, are consequences of it, is still an unre-
solved issue [43]. There has been an intense debate on the relationship between 
obesity and the sympathoadrenergic system. At the beginning of the 90s, based on 
urine catecholamines in cross-sectional studies, there was a consensus of a reduced 
activity in the sympathetic nervous and adrenal medullary system in obesity. 
However, more sophisticated and accurate methods such as sympathetic nerve 
recording techniques and isotope dilution methodology measuring noradrenaline 
release from sympathetic nerves, later demonstrated that human obesity was, in 
fact, accompanied by an activation of the sympathetic nervous system, which was 
believed to be an adaptation to the increased weight [42].
Few longitudinal studies have addressed this issue. Tataranni et al. studied 44 
Pima Indians over a period of 3.3 years and found that urine adrenaline and nor -
adrenaline excretion rates correlated negatively with changes in waist-to-thigh cir -
cumference ratio and body weight, respectively [44]. Masuo et al. on the other hand, 
found resting plasma noradrenaline to be a positive predictor of changes in body 
mass index (BMI) over a 5-year period in 433 Japanese subjects [38]. Hence, the 
available data are contradictory, and the follow-up periods are short.
33.1.2.3  Sympathoadrenal Activity and Insulin Resistance
Insulin is a powerful determinant of sympathetic activity. Fasting suppresses [8] and 
overfeeding stimulates [45] the sympathetic nervous system through insulin-medi-
ated signals, in order to regulate diet-induced thermogenesis [46]. Landsberg 
hypothesized in 1986 that insulin-stimulated sympathetic activity in obese subjects, 
which is supposed to increase thermogenesis and thereby energy production and 
weight reduction, would unintendedly increase blood pressure, explaining the clus-
tering of obesity, insulin resistance, hypertension, and increased sympathetic activ-
ity in the metabolic syndrome [47]. Likewise, Reaven et al. asserted that insulin 
resistance and hyperinsulinemia are the primary events, with subsequent enhance-
ment of the sympathetic activity [48]. Julius, among others, postulated on the other 
hand that insulin resistance follows changes in muscle blood flow based on a raised 
activity in the sympathetic nervous system as the primary cause [49]. Sympathetic 
A. Flaa et al.501
vasoconstriction may induce insulin resistance by decreasing the number of open 
capillaries in the skeletal muscles. To compensate for hyperglycemia caused by 
decreased glucose extraction, the pancreas secretes more insulin.
The fact that insulin resistance and sympathetic activity are related in a positive 
feedback fashion leading to their reciprocal reinforcement [50] makes it difficult to 
identify which of the two precedes the other. Although there have been a large num-
ber of studies addressing this issue, the cross-sectional design of the studies has 
made it difficult to solve the “chicken-and-egg” puzzle. Only one longitudinal study 
has been performed prior to our study, and they demonstrated that the sympathetic 
activity seemed to precede hyperinsulinemia through a 10-year follow-up in 
Japanese subjects [51].
33.2  Aims
Based on our previous observations, we hypothesized that resting blood pressure 
was related to arterial plasma catecholamines, cardiovascular and sympathetic 
reactivity, and cardiovascular risk factors in a cross-sectional study in young men 
with low, normal, and high blood pressure who were unaware of their blood pres-
sure status [52]. In a follow-up study over 18 years, we hypothesized that initial 
sympathoadrenal reactivity to stress at 19 years of age was related to the develop-
ment of future cardiovascular risk factors such as (a) blood pressure [53], (b) obe-
sity [54], and (c) insulin resistance [55]. Furthermore, we examined whether 
reactivity to the cold pressor test and the mental stress test differed in predictive 
power [53– 55].
33.3  Subjects and Methods
33.3.1  Subjects
The data for the cross-sectional study [52] was collected in 1986–1989. All subjects 
were initially selected from the military draft procedures in 1986 and 1987, which 
is compulsory to all young men in Norway. In 1986 the number of screened subjects 
was 3861, while 4123 were screened in 1987. Blood pressure measurements on all 
the subjects attending in Oslo were undertaken once after 5 min of sitting. Mean 
blood pressure was thereafter calculated as diastolic blood pressure + pulse pres-
sure/3. None of the subjects were informed about the results of the blood pressure 
recordings at this stage, to avoid effects of hypertension labelling on responses to 
the forthcoming stress tests [30, 31]. We have previously published a cross-sectional 
study on subjects with low, normal, and high screening blood pressure and demon-
strated a clear tendency of normalization of the blood pressure in the high blood 
pressure group when reexamined after 30 min of rest in our laboratory [32]. Thus, 
in order to secure and reassess differences in resting blood pressure [52], the sub-
jects were reexamined in our laboratory on a separate day before final inclusion. 33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors502
Subjects belonging to the 98th to 99th percentile of the military screening blood 
pressure distribution were included if the mean blood pressure at reexamination 
exceeded the population blood pressure + 1 SD. Subjects of the 50th percentile were 
included if their mean blood pressure was within mean screening blood pressure ± 1 
SD. Subjects of the 1st percentile were included if their mean blood pressure was 
lower than mean screening blood pressure −1 SD. As these data were not published 
immediately after the examination, we published them at the time of reexamination 
18 years later.
In the follow-up study performed in 2005–2006 [53–55] we selected subjects 
from the 1st percentile, the 50th percentile, and the 95th–99th percentiles of the 
mean blood pressure distribution of the initial military screening, some of them 
were also included in the previous analyses [52]. All were previously healthy and of 
Caucasian origin except one who was half Asian and half Caucasian. 99 of the sub-
jects from entry had satisfactory examinations and were suitable for follow-up. Out 
of these, 81 (82%) subjects were available for examination at follow-up, and a total 
of eighteen were not reexamined; one was excluded due to probable i.v. drug addic-
tion, two lived abroad and were not able to attend, four did not answer any letters or 
calls, and eleven did not want to participate. The subjects that were not eligible for 
follow-up did not differ from eligible subjects in resting blood pressure, heart rate, 
BMI, waist circumference, or catecholamine stress responses at entry. One subject 
who was reexamined had ulcerative colitis and had to be excluded from further 
analyses due to a previous colectomy and an excessive intake of water and salt. At 
follow-up, 21 subjects (25.9%) reported having one or more of the following dis-
eases: hypertension (9 subjects), hypercholesterolemia [12], diabetes mellitus [3], 
and previous myocardial infarction [1]. Eight of these subjects used one or more of 
the following medications regularly: angiotensin receptor blockers [3], β-blockers 
[3], ACE inhibitor [1], statins [2], antidiabetics [3], and acetylsalicylic acid [1] 
(Fig. 33.6).
Selection procedure
18-year-old men in Oslo (n≈3500/year)
Systolic blood pressure (mmHg)Persons (n)
60 200 140 160 180 120 100 80140/90
0700
400
300
200
100500600Fig. 33.6 Distribution of 
blood pressure at screening
A. Flaa et al.503
33.3.2  Methods
33.3.2.1  Blood Pressure Measurements
Screening measurements at military draft procedures in 1986 and resting measure-
ments in the laboratory were determined by an automatic auscultatory device (Boso-
digital II S, Bosh & Sohn GmbH u Co, Jungingen, Germany) validated against a 
sphygmomanometer, and a hidden printer, to serve as an unbiased measurement. 
However, the diastolic blood pressure distribution of the 3861 men at screening was 
skewed to the left, suggesting an underestimating in some subjects. Thus, in 1987 
we decided to use a standard sphygmomanometer.
Blood pressures during the stress tests in the laboratory at entry were monitored 
directly by a canula in the brachial artery of the nondominant arm. All subjects were 
unaware of their blood pressure status, previously shown to be a confounding factor 
[1, 30, 31].
At follow-up, resting blood pressure was measured three times with a mercury 
sphygmomanometer on the left arm after at least 15 min of sitting, and was calcu-
lated as mean of the last two measurements.
33.3.2.2  Plasma Catecholamines
Arterial plasma catecholamines were measured by a radioenzymatic technique [56, 
57] as previously reported [24, 31]. All the blood samples were analyzed by the 
same technician at entry and at follow-up. The assay has been used for over 20 years 
in our laboratory, and is also precise at low plasma concentrations.
33.3.2.3  Insulin Resistance
Insulin resistance at follow-up [55] was quantified using the homeostasis model 
assessment for insulin resistance (HOMA-IR). HOMA-IR was calculated in fasting 
conditions as serum glucose (mmol/L) multiplied by serum insulin (pmol/L) and 
divided with 135, as described by Matthews et al. [58].
33.3.2.4  Stress Tests
Stress tests are designed to examine autonomic responses to different stimuli. We used 
three stress tests in the present work to activate the sympathoadrenal system. We sam-
pled plasma catecholamines and measured blood pressure and heart rate before, dur -
ing, and after the stress tests. The response to stress was defined as the mean values 
during the tests minus the baseline value or the absolute value during the tests [53].
Mental Stress Test
The mental arithmetic stress test has been widely used. In our studies, the subjects were 
asked to subtract the number “13” repetitively starting from “1079” for 5 min, while a 
metronome made noise at a frequency of 2 Hz. The subjects had to calculate loudly, 
and feedback was given at any miscalculation. Mental stress test is known to elicit a 
fight and flight reaction, and is a classic example of a β -adrenergic response, where the 
increased blood pressure is mediated primarily via an increase of cardiac output [59, 
60]. Total peripheral resistance shows little change during the test (Fig. 33.7).33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors504
Cold Pressor Test
Hines and Brown introduced this test in 1932 [61], where one hand is completely 
immersed in ice water (0–2 °C) for 1–6 min. We used 1 min in our studies. In 
contrast to the mental stress test, the cold pressor test elicits a response that is 
predominantly mediated by α -adrenergic vasoconstriction [60]. This means that 
the observed increase in blood pressure mainly is due to an increased total periph-
eral resistance.
Orthostatic Test
The subjects were asked to stand up for 2 min from the supine position for the ortho-
static stress test [52]. After standing up, pooling of the blood takes place in the legs. 
A transient reduction in cardiac output elicits a reflex increase in sympathetic activ-
ity [62].
Statistics
The data were analyzed using the statistical package SPSS version 12.0 [52] and 
14.0 [53–55] for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). Parametric tests were used for 
normally distributed data and nonparametric when normality was not achieved by 
natural log transformation.
Fig. 33.7 Work sheet and 
metronome used during 
mental stress testing of 
young men
A. Flaa et al.505
One way analysis of variance (ANOV A) with trend analysis or Kruskal-Wallis test 
was used to compare differences between the initial screening groups [52]. 
Subsequent Student’s t-tests without adjustments were carried out if there was any 
significant group interaction. The effect of stress tests on blood pressure and plasma 
catecholamines was additionally analyzed by repeated-measures ANOV A, and group 
differences were analyzed by effect*group interaction, with subsequent t-tests [52].
Associations between continuous variables were assessed using Pearson’s correla-
tions or Spearman’s rank correlation, while Chi-Square testing with linear-by-linear 
association was used for dichotomous. In order to adjust for possible confounders, linear 
regression analysis was performed. Due to a large number of univariate correlation anal-
yses [53], the Bonferroni correction was used to reduce the risk of Type 1 errors.
Paired samples T-tests or the Wilcoxon test were used to analyze possible changes 
in normally distributed continuous variables from entry to follow-up [53–55], while 
categorical variables were analyzed by sign test.
33.4  Results
33.4.1  Cross-Sectional Associations Between Resting Blood 
Pressure and Sympathoadrenal Activity and Stress 
Reactivity
Differences in resting blood pressure among the 19-year-old men were reflected by 
a similar pattern in both arterial adrenaline and noradrenaline concentration at rest. 
Mental stress test, cold pressor test, and orthostatic test evoked significant cardio-
vascular and catecholamine responses in all blood pressure groups [52]. However, 
mental stress test was the only test that induced differential responses between the 
three blood pressure groups, where the high blood pressure group showed the most 
and the low blood pressure group the least pronounced response in blood pressure, 
heart rate, and plasma catecholamines [52]. The present study also showed that 
lower blood pressure was associated with a better lipoprotein profile and a lower 
fructosamine concentration and waist-hip ratio (Fig. 33.8).
33.4.2  Sympathoadrenal Reactivity as a Predictor  
of Future Blood Pressure
The adrenaline and noradrenaline concentrations during mental stress test were sig-
nificant predictors of future systolic blood pressure, while the plasma catecholamine 
levels at rest and during the cold pressor test did not show significant associations 
with later blood pressure [53]. Together, in the multiple regression model, adrena-
line and noradrenaline levels during mental stress explained 12.7% of the variation 
of future systolic blood pressure [53], after adjusting for resting blood pressure, 
family history, BMI at entry, and systolic blood pressure during stress (Adj.R2 for 
the whole model: 0.65) (Fig. 33.9).33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors506
33.4.3  Sympathoadrenal Reactivity as a Predictor  
of Future Body Fat
The adrenaline response to mental stress was negatively related to changes in BMI 
and waist circumference during the follow-up in univariate analyses [54]. In supple-
mentary multiple regression analyses, the adrenaline response was a highly consis-
tent negative predictor of future BMI, waist circumference, and triceps skinfold 
thickness after adjusting for exercise level and initial BMI, waist circumference, or 
triceps skinfold [54]. The noradrenaline response to mental stress was a weak posi-
tive predictor for future waist circumference, and did not significantly predict BMI 
and triceps skinfold thickness [54]. None of the other adrenaline or noradrenaline 
parameters during rest or cold pressor test were significantly related to changes in 
BMI, waist circumference, or triceps skinfold thickness (Fig. 33.10).
Resting Arterial Catecholamine Concentrations
Adrenaline010203040506070
020406080100120140160
Noradrenalinepg/mLpg/mL
31±643±962±10
99±12 100±13136±12Low BP
 Intermediate BP High BP
Blood pressure screening at
military enlistment
19-year-old men, N ~ 40001%50%
99%n
MBP
(mm Hg)
Flaa et al. Hypertension 2006;47:396-402
Fig. 33.8 Arterial plasma catecholamines in young men from 1st, 50th, and 99th percentiles of 
blood pressure at screening
A. Flaa et al.507
Resting SBP at 18-Year Follow-Up
12 3120125130135140SBP (mm Hg)
Arterial noradrenaline tertile at baseline
during mental stress testP=.004
Flaa A et al. Hypertension. 2008;32:336-341.Fig. 33.9 Arterial plasma 
noradrenaline measured 
during mental stress test 
predicts systolic blood 
pressure at 18-year 
follow-up
012345678
0
-2
-42468101214161820
01234
-1
-2
-3
-456789
Quartiles of epinephrine response to the mental stress testChange in body
mass index (kg/m2)Change in waist
circumference (cm)
P=.01 P=.007 P=.10
1234 1234 1 234Change in triceps
skinfold thickness (mm)
Flaa A et al. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008;87:1596-1601.
Fig. 33.10 Arterial plasma adrenaline measured during mental stress negatively predicts changes 
in body built at 18-year follow-up33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors508
33.4.4  Sympathoadrenal Reactivity as a Predictor of Future 
Insulin Resistance
The noradrenaline response to the cold pressor test was positively related to fasting 
plasma glucose and HOMA-IR at follow-up in univariate analyses [55]. In the mul-
tiple regression analyses, the noradrenaline response was an independent positive 
predictor of HOMA-IR [55]. There were no significant associations with plasma 
catecholamines at rest or during mental stress (Fig. 33.11).
33.5  Discussion
33.5.1  Methodological Aspects
33.5.1.1  Subjects
The participants were recruited from the military draft procedures in Oslo, securing 
a homogenous sample of subjects at the same age, race, and gender, thus reducing the 
biological and statistical variance. However, this advantage also implies a limited 
ability to generalize the present results to older subjects, other ethnicities and women.
We did not include a randomized sample from military screening, but rather a 
stratified selection which leads to an overrepresentation of subjects with extreme 
low and high blood pressure. However, we had a moderate sample size due to our 
resource demanding invasive examinations, and the blood pressure criteria ensured 
a satisfying dispersion of the blood pressure range, which makes it easier to demon-
strate relationships.
The military blood pressure screening was based on one blood pressure record-
ing in the sitting position after 5 min of rest. These measurements involve elements 
of both rest and stress, and are not fulfilling the normal guidelines on blood pressure 0 12 344.54.74.95.15.35.55.75.9
0 12 3400.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.0
Quartile of baseline arterial NA
response to cold pressor testQuartile of baseline arterial NA
response to cold pressor testFasting plasma glucose at
follow-up (mmol/L)
HOMA-IR at follow-upP=.004 P=.010
NA = noradrenaline.
Flaa et al. Metabolism 2008;57:1422-1427.Fasting glucose and HOMA-IR at 18-Year Follow-Up
Fig. 33.11 Arterial plasma noradrenaline responses to cold pressor test predict glucose and 
HOMA-index at 18-year follow-up
A. Flaa et al.509
measurements. It may be questioned whether one screening blood pressure value is 
representative for the subject’s true blood pressure level, as current guidelines rec-
ommend several measurements taken over separate occasions over a period of time, 
due to spontaneous variations both during days and between days [63]. Nevertheless, 
blood pressure was determined according to the guidelines later in laboratory on the 
selected individuals, ensuring resting conditions.
We compared the three blood pressure groups on their response to the three dif-
ferent stress tests in a cross-sectional study [52]. The selection procedure (military 
enlistment) may be regarded as a psychological stress situation, raising the question 
whether subjects with high blood pressure were partly preselected to respond vigor -
ously to the mental stress test. However, there is evidence that hypertension and 
high normal blood pressure are associated with increased cardiovascular and sym-
pathoadrenal reactivity to mental stress compared to physical stress, such as ortho-
static and cold pressor test [64]. The sample groups were rather small in this study 
(n = 15, 15 and 13 in the low (gr. 1), normal (gr. 2) and high blood pressure group 
(gr. 3), respectively), and the lack of significant findings during the cold pressor test 
and orthostatic test could be due to insufficient power. However, the statistical 
power to detect a similar difference during cold pressor test and orthostatic test as 
during mental stress test was above 80% for adrenaline, noradrenaline, mean blood 
pressure and heart rate between gr. 1 and 3, indicating sufficient sample sizes.
At follow-up [53– 55], we were able to analyze 80 subjects of the original 99 at 
entry. This is a remarkably high attendance rate after so many years, and the fact that 
subjects not eligible for follow-up had similar resting blood pressure, heart rate, 
BMI, waist circumference, and catecholamine stress responses at entry as the 80 
eligible subjects, decreases the risk of sample bias. Due to certain diseases among the 
subjects at follow-up, analyses and interpretations were performed with precautions. 
When examining development of blood pressure, we excluded five subjects using 
blood pressure lowering treatment. β -Blockers may affect body weight, but including 
this parameter in the analyses of weight development did not alter the results, and we 
chose to remove the variable from the final analyses as there were only three subjects 
using them. Regarding development of insulin resistance, some would possibly argue 
that the three subjects with type 2 diabetes should be excluded from the analyses. 
However, they represent a true and important part of the blood glucose distribution in 
the population. Furthermore, they took oral antidiabetics, and as none of them took 
insulin, HOMA-IR was a suitable measure of insulin resistance in these subjects.
According to the selection procedure at entry, we could have assessed the preva-
lence of the various risk factors at follow-up in the three original blood pressure 
groups. Even though there are close cross-sectional relationship between these 
groups and catecholamine levels as demonstrated [52], we chose to focus our atten-
tion on the cardiovascular and catecholamine parameters independently of the ini-
tial blood pressure groups, making it possible to study the various components of 
the sympathoadrenal system during rest and stress tests in more detail. Moreover, 
even though they originally represented three different groups of blood pressure at 
screening, their blood pressure showed a normal distribution when reexamined in 
laboratory due to the regression to the mean.33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors510
33.5.1.2  Reproducibility and Generalizability of Stress Tests
There are several methods available to test reactivity to stress, and to better stan-
dardize and measure reactivity certain laboratory stress tests have been developed. 
Test-retest reproducibility varies, but stability has been found to increase when the 
number of measurements during stress tests increases [65]. Due to continuous intra-
arterial blood pressure and heart rate monitoring during the stress tests, we were 
able to perform more measurements and calculate the mean during each stress test. 
There are, however, no data available on reproducibility on catecholamine 
reactivity.
Another aspect is whether these tests performed in an artificial setting elicit 
responses which are in correspondence with real life stress. If individual differ -
ences in stress reactivity do not reflect stress responses outside the laboratory, they 
become less plausible as a cause of disease, although they may serve as a risk fac-
tor [66]. The literature on generalizability is inconsistent. Some have observed 
significant correlations between blood pressure reactions to mental stress tests and 
blood pressure variability during waking hours [67] and between systolic blood 
pressure response to cognitive tasks and waking and sleeping systolic blood pres-
sure levels [68]. Others, on the other hand, have found only moderate relation 
between systolic and diastolic blood pressure reactions to several stressors and 
ambulatory systolic blood pressure [69]. One study found that type A and type B 
subjects differed in their heart rate and blood pressure responses to a cognitive task 
while there were no differences in the daily life [70]. van Doornen and van Blokland 
compared responses to two “active coping tasks” and a “passive coping task” (the 
cold pressor test) with the responses while anticipating a strong and well-defined 
stressor: the public defense of their PhD thesis [71]. They found that heart rate 
response to a reaction time task and the cold pressor test added significantly to the 
prediction of real life blood pressure levels and responses more than the prediction 
in the basis of pretask baselines. The clear relationship between screening blood 
pressure and response to the mental stress test [52] indicates that psychological 
stress in our laboratory elicit the same responses as a stress situation in real life like 
the military enlistment.
Duration of Stress Tests
One may speculate whether the duration of the cold pressor test and orthostatic test 
was too short to compare with 5 min mental stress. The cold pressor test lasted for 
1 min in accordance with Hines and Brown, who introduced the test [61]. The peak 
response usually occurs within 30  s. Furthermore, an element of pain gradually 
dominates the test as the duration increases. Regarding the orthostatic test, Gehrking 
et al. have demonstrated a sensitivity of 88% for 1 min, and 99% for 2 min of head 
up tilt for detecting orthostatic hypotension [72]. All three stress tests had signifi-
cant effects on blood pressure, heart rate, and catecholamines, indicating a satisfac-
tory duration. Furthermore, the peak responses in heart rate, adrenaline and 
noradrenaline during mental stress were at 1 min. However, we cannot by certainty 
exclude group differences [52] if the cold pressor and orthostatic test had lasted 
longer.
A. Flaa et al.511
33.5.1.3  Plasma Catecholamines as Measurements 
of Sympathoadrenal Activation
Plasma catecholamines are together with microneurography preferred tests for ana-
lyzing acute effects of stress tests on the sympathoadrenal system [73]. Arterial 
catecholamine measurements have previously been reported to be a more sensitive 
marker of overall sympathetic activity than venous sampling, and are superior to 
venous catecholamines in separating hypertensive and normotensive groups [24]. 
The sympathetic nervous system shows a differentiated activation pattern according 
to the situation, and there is uncertainty which part of the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem may be the best determinant of weight development. Arterial samples reflect 
better the overall sympathetic activity including spillover from heart and kidney, 
while venous samples for a larger part reflect muscle sympathetic activity. Release 
from muscle sympathetic nerves contributes to approximately 50% of peripheral 
venous noradrenaline [74]. Thus, if sympathetic activity in muscle tissues is the 
most important determinant of future body fat, venous measurements would have 
been preferable, and could possibly explain the weak associations between nor -
adrenaline activity and weight development compared to adrenaline that we found 
[54]. However, there are no indications that muscle sympathetic activity is crucial in 
this regard. Clinically, fat tends to deposit centrally and the sympathetic stimulation 
of visceral areas is better reflected through arterial sampling. Likewise, regarding 
the prediction of insulin resistance, venous samples could possibly have demon-
strated an even better relationship between cold pressor responses and future insulin 
resistance than the findings of the present study, if one assumes that sympathetic 
activity to skeletal muscles is of most importance [55].
Regarding the adrenal medulla, arterial sampling is far better than venous when 
assessing the activity since about 50% of adrenaline is taken up by peripheral tis-
sues. Arterial concentrations are thus higher and more precisely determined than 
venous (Fig. 33.12).
33.5.1.4  Insulin Resistance and Obesity
Insulin resistance was measured by HOMA-IR [55], in addition to fasting plasma 
glucose. HOMA-IR has been compared with the gold standard euglycemic hyperin-
sulinemic clamp, and was found to correlate in normal subjects (r = 0.83, p < 0.01) 
and even better in diabetic subjects (r = 0.92, p < 0.0001), indicating that HOMA-IR 
is valid also among diabetic subjects [58]. Unfortunately, at entry we only had infor -
mation on fasting plasma glucose and were not able to determine HOMA-IR.
Traditionally, BMI has been used as a surrogate marker to assess the degree of obe-
sity. Overweight and obesity is defined by the World Health Organization as BMI  ≥ 25 
and ≥ 30, respectively [75]. In recent years intra-abdominal adiposity, measured as 
waist circumference, has been shown to be an important risk factor for cardiovascular 
disease [76], and the health risk is increased compared to general obesity measured 
with BMI [77]. The third body fat parameter used [54] was triceps skinfold thickness, 
a measure of subcutaneous fat. Even though this examination is more dependent on the 
examiner than the two previous, we included all three parameters in our analyses in 
order to demonstrate the very consistent pattern of our findings.33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors512
33.5.1.5  Statistics
The major part of the statistical analyses [53–55] was based on parametric tests for 
normally distributed data. However, the subjects represented three separated groups 
representing significantly different blood pressures at military screening. One may 
thus question the use of linear regression analyses on this sample. It turned out, 
however, that the extreme blood pressure values at screening normalized when reex-
amined in the laboratory, probably due to regression to the mean. Resting systolic 
and diastolic blood pressure ended up as normally distributed, and we chose to 
analyze the sample as a continuous one.
A large number of statistical tests were performed mainly without any correc-
tions for multiple testing, which may increase the risk of Type 1 error. However, 
the main purpose of the studies addressed a limited number of main hypotheses, 
and some of the additional statistical analyses were included in order to compare 
our studies with previous research. We used the Bonferroni correction on the uni-
variate analyses [53]. We believe, however, that this procedure may have led to 
some Type 2 errors. As the significance level was very conservatively set to 
p < 0.001, several of the heart rate and catecholamine variables did not end up as 
significant predictors of future blood pressure, despite a consistent pattern between 
them.
Origin of Venous Plasma Catecholamines
H Reims 2003A = Adrenaline
NA = Noradrenaline
NA NA
Forear m
TissueVein ArteryA ANANA
50%50%
50%Sympathetic
Nerve
Blood
SampleKidne ys
Skeletal Muscle
etc.
Adrenal Gland
Fig. 33.12 Origin of plasma catecholamines; arterial concentrations represent a mixture of 
venous catecholamines effluents from all organs
A. Flaa et al.513
33.5.2  Discussion of Results
33.5.2.1  Blood Pressure, Sympathoadrenal Activity, 
and Cardiovascular Risk Factors [52]
Due to a marked regression to the mean, there was in a previous study of ours a 
tendency that subjects with high screening blood pressure came close to normal 
when reexamined in laboratory [1]. To ensure differences in the resting blood pres-
sure, the subjects underwent a second blood pressure examination, where we 
selected only the ones with extreme low and high blood pressure in addition to 
subjects with normal levels. Among these subjects, we found a clear relationship 
between resting blood pressure and arterial plasma catecholamine levels. Even 
though there are several reports of increased catecholamine levels in subjects with 
high blood pressure [78–81], this is the first study demonstrating an association 
between plasma catecholamines and blood pressure within the whole range of rest-
ing blood pressure, by showing that subjects with low blood pressure have decreased 
sympathetic tone compared to normotensives. While awareness of hypertension 
plays a role [30, 31, 56], it cannot explain the whole difference detected in cardio-
vascular and sympathoadrenal reactivity, as the associations demonstrated in our 
study were found in subjects unaware of their blood pressure status, indicating other 
explanations than mere awareness.
The original three screening groups showed a clear differentiation in cardio-
vascular and catecholamine responses to the mental stress test, in contrast to the 
cold pressor and orthostatic test where there were no such differences. There are 
several possible mechanisms explaining hyperreactivity to mental stress [60]: (1) 
Structural changes in the vascular wall or increased receptor sensitivity may 
amplify the pressor effect of catecholamines. However, one would have expected 
a similar hyperreactivity to the orthostatic and cold pressor test if vascular wall or 
receptor properties were the only explanation. (2) Hyperreactivity may be initi-
ated in subcortical structures (hypothalamus and brain stem). The fact that we 
found differences not only in blood pressure and heart rate responses but also in 
catecholamine responses indicates a central origin. (3) The third option is mecha-
nisms located in the cortical areas, as each subject has a different perception and 
reaction pattern. Some have described a “hypertensive personality,” with a ten-
dency to be submissive, to avoid confrontations and to suppress anger. We have 
previously demonstrated that stress reactivity is related to certain personality 
traits like muscular tension, irritability, and detachment [82].
The significant relationships between blood pressure and the cardiovascular risk 
factors triglycerides, HDL, HDL-total cholesterol ratio, fructosamine, and waist-hip 
ratio in our study demonstrate how blood pressure may represent a marker of other 
risk factors, even in young subjects below the age of 20. Likewise, the Tecumseh 
study showed a clear evidence of a worse cardiometabolic profile in young subjects 
with borderline hypertension compared to normotensives [83].
Thus, our data [52] suggests that resting blood pressure reflects both sympathetic 
activity and other cardiovascular risk factors. Furthermore, as high screening blood 
pressure also relates to mental stress responses, it is reasonable to question whether 33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors514
sympathoadrenal responses to mental stress are related to the development of car -
diovascular risk factors.
33.5.2.2  Sympathoadrenal Activity and Development of Future 
Cardiovascular Risk Factors [53–55]
The subjects were reexamined in our laboratory 18 years after their first visit. It 
would have been of great interest to assess the predictive power of the initial cate-
cholamine levels regarding future risk of angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, 
stroke, renal failure, diabetes, heart failure, and mortality, but as the mean age was 
37 years at follow-up and organ damage often become evident at a later stage, we 
focused on elements of the metabolic syndrome, which may appear already at a 
young age. In addition to blood pressure, obesity, and insulin resistance, it would 
have been preferable to also present analyses on the association of future dyslipid-
emia, the last component of the metabolic syndrome [84]. However, due to the com-
bination of nonsignificant results and insufficient power, we were not able to draw 
any firm conclusions.
Sympathoadrenal Activity During Rest Conditions Versus Stress Reactivity
Previous longitudinal studies have mainly examined resting plasma catecholamines 
[36, 38, 51] or urinary catecholamines [44] as predictors of future blood pressure, 
obesity, and insulin resistance. However, we did not find any significant associations 
during rest. One reason could be insufficient power, even though we had a larger 
sample size than two of the mentioned studies [36, 44]. Another possible explana-
tion could be the different ethnicities represented in the various studies.
Anyhow, in contrast to these earlier studies, we found that catecholamines during 
stress were better predictors than the variables recorded at rest. Blood pressure at 
follow-up were markedly stronger related not only to catecholamine levels but also 
to blood pressure and heart rate during stress (especially mental stress) compared to 
rest [53]. Earlier findings have showed that casual office [85, 86] and ambulatory 
blood pressures [63, 87] are stronger predictors than the recommended standardized 
office measurements after several minutes of rest [28, 88], and measurements per -
formed during situations involving elements of stress activation may be more useful 
as predictors of future blood pressure than standardized resting measurements [89, 
90]. As for the prediction of weight gain [54] and insulin resistance [55], the stron-
gest predictors were adrenaline response during mental stress and noradrenaline 
during cold pressor test, respectively.
The apparent importance of stress tests may be explained by the excellent ability 
to detect certain characteristics among subjects at risk, due to the special properties 
of the various tests. As an example, regarding weight development [54], mental 
stress is known to induce a more pronounced adrenaline release than the cold pres-
sor test [60] and exerts its effects mainly through activation of β-receptors [48]. 
Thus, the association between mental stress reactivity and prediction of weight gain 
may indicate that reduced stimulation of β-adrenergic receptors plays an important 
role in the development of obesity. A low adrenaline response to mental stress in the 
laboratory possibly also reflects lower adrenaline reactivity during everyday life, 
A. Flaa et al.515
including stressful daily activities, thus favoring less β-receptor stimulation and a 
lower metabolic turnover and subsequent weight gain. The cold pressor test, on the 
other hand, seems more appropriate in predicting future insulin resistance [55], as 
this test predominantly acts by increasing the sympathetic activity to peripheral 
arterioles in skeletal muscles and skin. Thus, subjects characterized by elevated 
sympathetic activity to these organs with subsequent vasoconstriction may develop 
insulin resistance through reduced glucose uptake in skeletal muscles [91].
The choice of stress test may also be important in predicting hypertension. A 
large proportion of young subjects prone to develop hypertension are characterized 
by a hyperkinetic circulation [29, 35]. Later, there is a transition from this early 
stage of hypertension development with increased cardiac output and nearly normal 
total peripheral resistance, to the later stage characterized by normalization of the 
cardiac output and increased total peripheral resistance [32, 60]. We found that 
responses to mental stress, which are predominantly β-mediated, may be better pre-
dictors than responses to the cold pressor test in our young cohort. Using the cold 
pressor test in longitudinal hypertension studies may be suboptimal in young sub-
jects, as it elicits an α-adrenergic vascular response more than and a β-adrenergically 
mediated myocardial response [34, 92], and many of these young subjects prone to 
develop hypertension are characterized by the hyperkinetic circulation mediated by 
β-adrenergic receptors.
In contrast to studies on obesity and insulin resistance, much attention has been 
paid to stress testing and prediction of future development of hypertension in longi-
tudinal studies. The reactivity hypothesis states that subjects characterized by ele-
vated stress reactivity show increased cardiovascular risk [93]. One theory is that 
intermittent pressure elevations may lead to structural vascular changes, but attempts 
to produce irreversible, sustained blood pressure elevations purely as a consequence 
of transient elevations in dogs have not succeeded [94, 95]. Another possible link 
between hyperreactivity and development of hypertension is the direct effect of the 
catecholamines. Sympathetic stimulation has proven to be a trophic factor for vas-
cular hypertrophy [96]. Thus, hyperreactive subjects with increased surges of cate-
cholamine concentrations in the plasma may develop hypertrophy of smooth 
muscles in arterioles and increased total peripheral resistance, the hallmark of estab-
lished essential hypertension [97].
Cause or Consequence of Increased Sympathoadrenal Activity?
The relationship between the individual components of the metabolic syndrome is 
complex, and to establish cause and effect in this enmeshed web is extremely diffi-
cult. As mentioned, most of the literature on associations between sympathoadrenal 
activity and blood pressure, obesity, and insulin resistance are based on cross-sec-
tional studies, and long-term follow-up studies are preferable when exploring cause-
and-effect relationships. However, it is important to emphasize that even though we 
have demonstrated that sympathoadrenal reactivity predicts certain features of the 
metabolic syndrome after 18 years, this is not evidence of a causal role in the devel-
opment. Our findings only indicate in what order the events happen, and that there 
are significant associations between them. These associations could be explained by 33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors516
other unknown correlated factors. Another limitation is that we did not have plasma 
insulin measurements at entry [55], making it difficult to decide whether hyperreac-
tive subjects at entry already had developed insulin resistance. Despite these limita-
tions, the fact that the relationships remain significant after adjusting for several 
possible predictors strengthens the role of the sympathoadrenal system as a determi-
nant of future blood pressure, obesity, and insulin resistance.
Apparently, some of the present findings may represent a paradox. Increased 
sympathoadrenal activity predispose to insulin resistance [55]. On the other hand, 
development of obesity seems to be related to a reduced activity in the adrenal 
medulla [54]. However, the association between obesity and insulin resistance has 
been known for many years, and these two cardiovascular risk factors are probably 
reinforcing each other [98]. Wouldn’t it then be plausible that increased sympatho-
adrenal activity lead to both insulin resistance and obesity? It is important to note 
that adrenal medullary activity and overall sympathetic activity may show recipro-
cal alterations [8], and we believe that our findings are compatible with prior knowl-
edge: reduced activity in the adrenal medulla may predict the development of 
obesity, with subsequent increase in sympathetic activity and development of insu-
lin resistance (Fig.  33.4). It should be mentioned that noradrenaline tended to be a 
positive predictor of weight gain in the multiple regression analyses in our study 
[54], perhaps suggesting a more early role of obesity development than suggested in 
Figs. 33.4 and 33.13.
The Sympathoadrenal System and Blood Pressure [53]
The positive relationship in the present long-term study between plasma noradrena-
line concentration during mental stress at entry and systolic blood pressure at fol-
low-up independent of the initial blood pressure level strongly supports an important 
role of increased sympathetic nervous activity in early development of hypertension 
[29]. One may question the importance of our finding as the univariate correlation 
analyses of future blood pressure showed a much stronger relationship with blood 
pressure at entry compared to the catecholamine levels at entry in general. However, 
↓Adrenal medullary activity
Sympathetic activity↑Obesity
Insulin resistanceFig. 33.13 Potential relation 
between adrenal medullary activity 
and metabolism
A. Flaa et al.517
as shown in the multiple regression analyses, catecholamine levels may explain a 
remarkable high portion of the variance of future blood pressure after correcting for 
initial blood pressure and other known risk factors. Moreover, catecholamines after 
all are very indirect measures of true sympathoadrenal activity, thus one cannot 
expect too much from the analyses.
The catecholamines during mental stress seemed to have more importance in 
predicting future systolic blood pressure than diastolic blood pressure in the univari-
ate analyses. This may be due to the fact that the β-adrenergic stimulation elicited 
by the mental stress test mostly affects the cardiac output and the systolic blood 
pressure, in contrast to diastolic blood pressure which is more affected by total 
peripheral resistance and plasma volume. However, since there are certain overlaps 
in confidence intervals of the correlation coefficients, we should be cautious to draw 
conclusions.
The underlying pathogenic mechanism behind the possible causal role of the 
sympathoadrenal activity may be that increased sympathoadrenal activity stimu-
lates arteriolar remodeling, increasing the wall-to-lumen ratio, and thereby elevate 
the total peripheral resistance [99, 100]. Additionally, raised sympathetic activity is 
known to increase the blood viscosity [101], which again affects the peripheral 
resistance. Finally, elevated sympathetic tone to the kidneys will stimulate renin 
secretion, leading to the synthesis of angiotensin II and thereby promoting renal 
tubular reabsorption of sodium [11].
The Sympathoadrenal System and Obesity [54]
There is a clear relationship between obesity and the sympathoadrenal system. 
However, as mentioned earlier, the identification of cause and effect between the 
two of them is very difficult. Findings are heterogeneous, but a normal to high level 
of sympathetic activity is mostly seen in obesity [40]. Landsberg proposed that 
increased sympathetic activation and hypertension seen in obese subjects may be a 
consequence of insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia [47]. On the other hand, 
increased sympathetic activity is shown to reduce β-adrenergic sensitivity [102, 
103], thereby being a potential cause of obesity as hypothesized by Julius [104]. 
Representing a third option, there are reports suggesting the contrary, that reduced 
sympathoadrenal activity may be the predisposing factor. These apparently contra-
dicting theories are confusing. However, our data [54] suggests that reduced activity 
only in the adrenal medulla may lead to increased weight, and this weight gain may 
perhaps then trigger a subsequent activation of the sympathetic nervous system 
(Fig.  33.4). In a setting with increased sympathetic tone, the β-responsiveness may 
decrease, leading to further weight gain and blood pressure elevation [104–106]. 
Reims et al. have previously found that BMI and waist circumference in borderline 
hypertensive subjects are independently associated with lower adrenaline levels 
[27]. Thus, as activity in the adrenal medulla and sympathetic nervous system reflect 
related but distinctive aspects of autonomic functions, they may act in a reciprocal 
manner regarding weight development.33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors518
The Sympathoadrenal System and Insulin Resistance [55]
Insulin resistance may be perhaps the most important feature of the metabolic syn-
drome. In obese subjects, insulin resistance is by many authors believed to result 
from increased fat mass [15]. The question remains, however, what causes insulin 
resistance in lean subjects. There are of course many factors involved, including 
genetic susceptibility and lifestyle. Some believe that a possible underlying deter -
minant is the sympathetic nervous system [2 , 107]. Previous cross-sectional stud-
ies in our group have shown positive relationships between insulin resistance and 
plasma catecholamine levels and heart rate [108].
Insulin resistance is inversely related to the number of open capillaries [49], and 
our finding thus supports the hemodynamic hypothesis of Julius et al., stating that 
pressure-induced restriction of the microcirculation limits nutritional flow and 
thereby impairs glucose uptake in the skeletal muscle [109], which is the major site 
of insulin resistance [110]. Furthermore, a previous study found a direct relation-
ship between the number of sympathetic neural bursts to skeletal muscle tissue and 
HOMA-IR [111].
There are other possible mechanisms that may also explain how sympathetic 
overactivity could lead to insulin resistance. Catecholamines have a direct effect 
on the insulin action (not the secretion), thereby inhibiting the glucose uptake 
[112]. Moreover, β-adrenergic stimulation of skeletal muscle may promote a 
change to a higher proportion of poorly capillarized and insulin-resistant fast 
fibers [113]. Another possibility is that α -adrenergic vasoconstriction may con-
tribute to raised hematocrit and whole blood viscosity [114, 115], thereby lead-
ing to increased peripheral vascular resistance and reduced nutritional flow  
[16, 17].
Long-Term Stability of Responses to the Stress Tests
Cardiovascular hyperreactivity to stress must be reasonably stable if it is consid-
ered to be important in the development of hypertension and cardiovascular dis-
ease. We also investigated long-term stability of blood pressure, heart rate, 
adrenaline, and noradrenaline responses to a cold pressor test and a mental arith-
metic stress test (n  = 81, two occasions 18 years apart) [116]. The 18-year cor -
relations of the cardiovascular and adrenaline absolute responses during mental 
stress ranged from 0.6 to 0.8. The entry/follow-up correlation of systolic blood 
pressure during the mental stress test (95% CI: 0.69 to 0.86) was significantly 
higher than during the cold pressor test (95% CI: 0.30 to 0.65), and responses to 
mental stress overall appeared to be more stable than responses to the cold pres-
sor test. Our study suggested that cardiovascular and sympathoadrenal reactivity, 
specifically to mental stress, are relatively stable individual characteristics. These 
results support one of the necessary preconditions to consider hyperreactivity 
involved in the development of hypertension and cardiovascular disease 
(Fig. 33.14).
A. Flaa et al.519
 Conclusions
We found that resting blood pressure was related to arterial plasma catechol-
amines, cardiovascular and sympathetic reactivity, and cardiovascular risk fac-
tors in a cross-sectional study in young men with low, normal, and high blood 
pressure who were unaware of their blood pressure status [52].
In a follow-up study over 18 years, initial sympathoadrenal reactivity to stress 
at the age of 19 was related to the development of future blood pressure [53], 
body fat [54], and indices of insulin resistance [55]. The responses to the cold 
pressor test and the mental stress test seemed to have different predictive impact 
on the development of these risk factors.
Partly due to resource-demanding procedures, there are little available data 
regarding the effect of the sympathoadrenal system on development of estab-
lished cardiovascular morbidity and future mortality in follow-up studies. Blood 
pressure, heart rate, obesity, and insulin resistance, on the other hand, are well-
known risk factors for cardiovascular diseases like stroke, coronary artery dis-
ease, heart failure, and peripheral vascular disease.220
200
180
160
140Mean systolic BP – 2.  examination
120
100
100 120 140 160
Mean systolic BP – 1.  examinationSystolic b lood pressure responses to mental
arrhy tmetic stress testing 18 ye ars apart
r=0.79
p<0.001
1802 00 220
Fig. 33.14 Correlation between systolic blood pressures measured during mental arithmetic 
stress 18 years apart33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors520
Acknowledgments  This chapter is based on the PhD thesis that Arnljot Flaa, MD, defended at 
the University of Oslo in 2009. Though shortened the structure of the thesis has been maintained.
Conflict of interest: S.E.  Kjeldsen reports modest honoraria from ABDiiBRAHiM, Bayer, 
MSD and Takeda. The other authors report no conflicts.
References
 1. Rostrup M, Westheim A, Kjeldsen SE, Eide I. Cardiovascular reactivity, coronary risk fac-
tors, and sympathetic activity in young men. Hypertension. 1993;22(6):891–9.
 2. Moan A, Nordby G, Rostrup M, Eide I, Kjeldsen SE. Insulin sensitivity, sympathetic activity, 
and cardiovascular reactivity in young men. Am J Hypertens. 1995;8(3):268–75.
 3. Fossum E, Hoieggen A, Moan A, Rostrup M, Nordby G, Kjeldsen SE.  Relationship 
between insulin sensitivity and maximal forearm blood flow in young men. Hypertension. 
1998;32(5):838–43.
 4. Shields RW Jr. Functional anatomy of the autonomic nervous system. J Clin Neurophysiol. 
1993;10(1):2–13.
 5. Goldstein DS. Peripheral catecholaminergic systems. Stress, catecholamines, and cardiovas-
cular disease. New York: Oxford University Press; 1995. p. 103–63.
 6. Lipworth BJ.  Clinical pharmacology of beta 3-adrenoceptors. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 
1996;42(3):291–300.
 7. Gauthier C, Seze-Goismier C, Rozec B. Beta 3-adrenoceptors in the cardiovascular system. 
Clin Hemorheol Microcirc. 2007;37(1–2):193–204.
 8. Young JB, Rosa RM, Landsberg L. Dissociation of sympathetic nervous system and adrenal 
medullary responses. Am J Phys. 1984;247(1 Pt 1):E35–40.
 9. Levy RL, White PD, Stroud WD, Hillman CC. Transient tachycardia. Prognostic significance 
alone and in association with transient hypertension. JAMA. 1945;129(9):585–8.
 10. Levy RL, Hillman CC, Stroud WD, White PD. Transient hypertension. Its significance in 
terms of later development of sustained hypertension and cardiovascular-renal diseases. 
JAMA. 1944;126(13):829–33.
 11. Grassi G, Vailati S, Bertinieri G, et  al. Heart rate as marker of sympathetic activity. J 
Hypertens. 1998;16(11):1635–9.
 12. Seals DR, Dinenno FA. Collateral damage: cardiovascular consequences of chronic sympa-
thetic activation with human aging. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2004;287(5):H1895–905.
 13. Ernsberger P, Koletsky RJ, Friedman JE. Contribution of sympathetic nervous system overac-
tivity to cardiovascular and metabolic disease. Rev Contemp Pharmacother. 1998;9(7):411–28.
 14. Lakka HM, Laaksonen DE, Lakka TA, et al. The metabolic syndrome and total and cardio-
vascular disease mortality in middle-aged men. JAMA. 2002;288(21):2709–16.
 15. Mancia G, Bousquet P, Elghozi JL, et al. The sympathetic nervous system and the metabolic 
syndrome. J Hypertens. 2007;25(5):909–20.
 16. Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults. 
Executive summary of the third report of the National Cholesterol Education Program 
(NCEP) expert panel on detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in 
adults (adult treatment panel III). JAMA. 2001;285(19):2486–97.
 17. Alberti KGM, Zimmet P, Shaw J.  The metabolic syndrome--a new worldwide definition. 
Lancet. 2005;366(9491):1059–62.
 18. Esposito K, Giugliano D. The metabolic syndrome and inflammation: association or causa-
tion? Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2004;14(5):228–32.
 19. Siani A, Strazzullo P. Tackling the genetic bases of metabolic syndrome: a realistic objective? 
Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2006;16(5):309–12.
 20. Ritchie SA, Connell JM. The link between abdominal obesity, metabolic syndrome and car -
diovascular disease. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2007;17(4):319–26.
A. Flaa et al.521
 21. Grassi G.  Sympathetic overdrive and cardiovascular risk in the metabolic syndrome. 
Hypertens Res. 2006;29(11):839–47.
 22. Grassi G, Quarti-Trevano F, Seravalle G, Dell'Oro R.  Cardiovascular risk and adrenergic 
overdrive in the metabolic syndrome. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2007;17(6):473–81.
 23. Beevers G, Lip GYH, O’Brien E. ABC of hypertension: the pathophysiology of hyperten-
sion. BMJ. 2001;322(7291):912–6.
 24. Kjeldsen SE, Flaaten B, Eide I, Helgeland A, Leren P. Evidence of increased peripheral cat-
echolamine release in patients with long-standing, untreated essential hypertension. Scand J 
Clin Lab Invest. 1982;42(3):217–23.
 25. de Champlain J, Petrovich M, Gonzalez M, Lebeau R, Nadeau R.  Abnormal cardiovas-
cular reactivity in borderline and mild essential hypertension. Hypertension. 1991;17(4 
Suppl):III22–8.
 26. Kjeldsen SE, Zweifler AJ, Petrin J, Weder AB, Julius S. Sympathetic nervous system involve-
ment in essential hypertension: increased platelet noradrenaline coincides with decreased 
beta-adrenoreceptor responsiveness. Blood Press. 1994;3(3):164–71.
 27. Reims HM, Fossum E, Hoieggen A, Moan A, Eide I, Kjeldsen SE. Adrenal medullary over -
activity in lean, borderline hypertensive young men. Am J Hypertens. 2004;17(7):611–8.
 28. Julius S, Majahalme S. The changing face of sympathetic overactivity in hypertension. Ann 
Med. 2000;32(5):365–70.
 29. Lund-Johansen P. Hemodynamic concepts of hypertension: cardiac output versus peripheral 
vascular resistance. In: Birkenhager WH, Robertson JIS, Zanchetti A, editors. Handbook of 
hypertension, Hypertension in the twentieth century: concepts and achievements, vol. 22. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2004. p. 151–72.
 30. Rostrup M, Kjeldsen SE, Eide IK. Awareness of hypertension increases blood pressure and 
sympathetic responses to cold pressor test. Am J Hypertens. 1990;3(12Pt1):912–7.
 31. Rostrup M, Mundal HH, Westheim A, Eide I. Awareness of high blood pressure increases 
arterial plasma catecholamines, platelet noradrenaline and adrenergic responses to mental 
stress. J Hypertens. 1991;9(2):159–66.
 32. Rostrup M, Ekeberg O. Awareness of high blood pressure influences on psychological and 
sympathetic responses. J Psychosom Res. 1992;36(2):117–23.
 33. Cowley AW Jr. The concept of autoregulation of total blood flow and its role in hypertension. 
Am J Med. 1980;68(6):906–16.
 34. Folkow B. Physiological aspects of primary hypertension. Physiol Rev. 1982;62(2):347–504.
 35. Julius S. Transition from high cardiac output to elevated vascular resistance in hypertension. 
Am Heart J. 1988;116(2 Pt 2):600–6.
 36. Bohm RO, van Baak MA, van Hooff ME, Mooy J, Rahn KH. A long-term study of plasma 
catecholamine levels and plasma renin activity in borderline hypertension. J Hypertens. 
1987;5(6):655–61.
 37. Perini C, Muller FB, Buhler FR. Suppressed aggression accelerates early development of 
essential hypertension. J Hypertens. 1991;9(6):499–503.
 38. Masuo K, Kawaguchi H, Mikami H, Ogihara T, Tuck ML. Serum uric acid and plasma nor -
epinephrine concentrations predict subsequent weight gain and blood pressure elevation. 
Hypertension. 2003;42(4):474–80.
 39. Lefebvre PJ, Scheen AJ. Obesity: causes and new treatments. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 
2001;109(Suppl 2):S215–24.
 40. Baak MA.  The peripheral sympathetic nervous system in human obesity. Obes Rev. 
2001;2(1):3–14.
 41. Masuo K, Katsuya T, Fu Y , Rakugi H, Ogihara T, Tuck ML. Beta2- and beta3-adrenergic 
receptor polymorphisms are related to the onset of weight gain and blood pressure elevation 
over 5 years. Circulation. 2005;111(25):3429–34.
 42. Eikelis N, Esler M. The neurobiology of human obesity. Exp Physiol. 2005;90(5):673–82.
 43. Tentolouris N, Liatis S, Katsilambros N. Sympathetic system activity in obesity and meta-
bolic syndrome. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006;1083:129–52.33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors522
 44. Tataranni PA, Young JB, Bogardus C, Ravussin E. A low sympathoadrenal activity is associ-
ated with body weight gain and development of central adiposity in Pima Indian men. Obes 
Res. 1997;5(4):341–7.
 45. Young JB, Landsberg L. Stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system during sucrose feed-
ing. Nature. 1977;269(5629):615–7.
 46. Landsberg L. Role of the sympathetic adrenal system in the pathogenesis of the insulin resis-
tance syndrome. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1999;892:84–90.
 47. Landsberg L. Diet, obesity and hypertension: an hypothesis involving insulin, the sympa-
thetic nervous system, and adaptive thermogenesis. QJM. 1986;61(3):1081–90.
 48. Reaven GM, Lithell H, Landsberg L.  Hypertension and associated metabolic abnor -
malities--the role of insulin resistance and the sympathoadrenal system. N Engl J Med. 
1996;334(6):374–81.
 49. Julius S, Gudbrandsson T, Jamerson K, Tariq SS, Andersson O.  The hemodynamic link 
between insulin resistance and hypertension. J Hypertens. 1991;9(11):983–6.
 50. Kaaja RJ, Poyhonen-Alho MK. Insulin resistance and sympathetic overactivity in women. J 
Hypertens. 2006;24(1):131–41.
 51. Masuo K, Mikami H, Ogihara T, Tuck ML. Sympathetic nerve hyperactivity precedes hyper -
insulinemia and blood pressure elevation in a young, nonobese Japanese population. Am J 
Hypertens. 1997;10(1):77–83.
 52. Flaa A, Mundal HH, Eide IK, Kjeldsen SE, Rostrup M. Sympathetic activity and cardio-
vascular risk factors in young men in the low, normal, and high blood pressure ranges. 
Hypertension. 2006;47(3):396–402.
 53. Flaa A, Kjeldsen SE, Eide IK, Rostrup M. Sympathoadrenal stress reactivity is a predictor of 
future blood pressure – an 18-year follow-up study. Hypertension. 2008;52(2):336–41.
 54. Flaa A, Sandvik L, Kjeldsen SE, Eide IK, Rostrup M. Does sympathoadrenal activity predict 
changes in body fat? – An 18-year follow-up study. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008;87(6):1596–601.
 55. Flaa A, Aksnes TA, Kjeldsen SE, Eide IK, Rostrup M. Increased sympathetic reactivity may 
predict insulin resistance – An 18-year follow-up study. Metabolism. 2008;57(10):1422–7.
 56. Passon PG, Peuler JD.  A simplified radioenzymatic assay for plasma norepinephrine and 
epinephrine. Anal Biochem. 1973;51:618–31.
 57. Peuler JD, Johnson GA. Simultaneous single isotope radioenzymatic assay of plasma norepi-
nephrine, epinephrine and dopamine. Life Sci. 1977;21(5):625–36.
 58. Matthews DR, Hosker JP, Rudenski AS, Naylor BA, Treacher DF, Turner RC. Homeostasis 
model assessment: insulin resistance and beta-cell function from fasting plasma glucose and 
insulin concentrations in man. Diabetologia. 1985;28(7):412–9.
 59. Brod J, FENCL V , HEJL Z, JIRKA J. Circulatory changes underlying blood pressure eleva-
tion during acute emotional stress (mental arithmetic) in normotensive and hypertensive sub-
jects. Clin Sci. 1959;18:269–79.
 60. Pickering TG, Gerin W. Area review: blood pressure reactivity: cardiovascular reactivity in 
the laboratory and the role of behavioral factors in hypertension: a critical review. Ann Behav 
Med. 1990;12(1):3–16.
 61. Hines EA, Brown GE. A standard stimulus for measuring vasomotor reactions: its applica-
tion in the study of hypertension. Mayo Clin Proc. 1932;7:332–5.
 62. Hohnloser SH, Klingenheben T. Basic autonomic tests. In: Malik M, editor. Clinical guide to 
cardiac autonomic tests. Dordrecht: Kleuwer Academic Publishers; 1998. p. 51–65.
 63. Mancia G, De Backer G, Dominiczak A, et al. Guidelines for the Management of Arterial 
Hypertension: the task force for the Management of Arterial Hypertension of the European 
Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). J 
Hypertens. 2007;25(6):1105–87.
 64. Eliasson K, Hjemdahl P, Kahan T. Circulatory and sympatho-adrenal responses to stress in 
borderline and established hypertension. J Hypertens. 1983;1(2):131–9.
 65. Swain A, Suls J. Reproducibility of blood pressure and heart rate reactivity: a meta-analysis. 
Psychophysiology. 1996;33(2):162–74.
A. Flaa et al.523
 66. Kamarck TW, Lovallo WR. Cardiovascular reactivity to psychological challenge: conceptual 
and measurement considerations. Psychosom Med. 2003;65(1):9–21.
 67. Floras JS, Hassan MO, Jones JV , Sleight P. Pressor responses to laboratory stresses and day-
time blood pressure variability. J Hypertens. 1987;5(6):715–9.
 68. Southard DR, Coates TJ, Kolodner K, Parker FC, Padgett NE, Kennedy HL. Relationship 
between mood and blood pressure in the natural environment: an adolescent population. 
Health Psychol. 1986;5(5):469–80.
 69. Van Egeren LF, Sparrow AW. Laboratory stress testing to assess real-life cardiovascular reac-
tivity. Psychosom Med. 1989;51(1):1–9.
 70. Schneider RH, Julius S, Karunas R. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring and laboratory 
reactivity in type A behavior and components. Psychosom Med. 1989;51(3):290–305.
 71. van Doornen LJ, van Blokland RW. The relationship between cardiovascular and catechol-
amine reactions to laboratory and real-life stress. Psychophysiology. 1992;29(2):173–81.
 72. Gehrking JA, Hines SM, Benrud-Larson LM, Opher-Gehrking TL, Low PA.  What is the 
minimum duration of head-up tilt necessary to detect orthostatic hypotension? Clin Auton 
Res. 2005;15(2):71–5.
 73. Grassi G, Seravalle G, Bolla G, et al. Heart rate as a sympathetic marker during acute adren-
ergic challenge. J Hypertens. 2008;26(1):70–5.
 74. Kjeldsen SE, Schork NJ, Leren P, Eide IK. Arterial plasma norepinephrine correlates to blood pres-
sure in middle-aged men with sustained essential hypertension. Am Heart J. 1989;118(4):775–81.
 75. James PT, Leach R, Kalamara E, Shayeghi M. The worldwide obesity epidemic. Obes Res. 
2001;9(Suppl 4):228S–33S.
 76. Misra A, Vikram NK. Clinical and pathophysiological consequences of abdominal adiposity 
and abdominal adipose tissue depots. Nutrition. 2003;19(5):457–66.
 77. Yusuf S, Hawken S, Ounpuu S, et al. Obesity and the risk of myocardial infarction in 27,000 
participants from 52 countries: a case-control study. Lancet. 2005;366(9497):1640–9.
 78. Clausen JO, Ibsen H, Dige-Petersen H, Borch-Johnsen K, Pedersen O. The importance of 
adrenaline, insulin and insulin sensitivity as determinants for blood pressure in young Danes. 
J Hypertens. 1995;13(5):499–505.
 79. Julius S. The evidence for a pathophysiologic significance of the sympathetic overactivity in 
hypertension. Clin Exp Hypertens. 1996;18(3–4):305–21.
 80. Mancia G. Bjorn Folkow Award Lecture. The sympathetic nervous system in hypertension. J 
Hypertens. 1997;15(12 Pt 2):1553–65.
 81. Fossum E, Hoieggen A, Reims HM, et al. High screening blood pressure is related to sym-
pathetic nervous system activity and insulin resistance in healthy young men. Blood Press. 
2004;13(2):89–94.
 82. Flaa A, Ekeberg O, Kjeldsen SE, Rostrup M. Personality may influence reactivity to stress. 
Biopsychosoc Med. 2007;1:5.
 83. Julius S, Jamerson K, Mejia A, Krause L, Schork N, Jones K. The association of borderline 
hypertension with target organ changes and higher coronary risk. Tecumseh Blood Pressure 
study. JAMA. 1990;264(3):354–8.
 84. LeBlanc J, Cote J, Jobin M, Labrie A. Plasma catecholamines and cardiovascular responses 
to cold and mental activity. J Appl Physiol. 1979;47(6):1207–11.
 85. Georgiades A, de Faire U, Lemne C. Clinical prediction of normotension in borderline hyper -
tensive men--a 10 year study. J Hypertens. 2004;22(3):471–8.
 86. Jokiniitty JM, Majahalme SK, Kahonen MA, Tuomisto MT, Turjanmaa VM.  Prediction 
of blood pressure level and need for antihypertensive medication: 10 years of follow-up. J 
Hypertens. 2001;19(7):1193–201.
 87. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. Seventh report of the Joint National Committee 
on prevention, detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood pressure. Hypertension. 
2003;42(6):1206–52.
 88. Thomas CB, Duszynski KR. Blood pressure levels in young adulthood as predictors of hyper -
tension and the fate of the cold pressor test. Johns Hopkins Med J. 1982;151(3):93–100.33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk Factors524
 89. Lovallo WR, Gerin W. Psychophysiological reactivity: mechanisms and pathways to cardio-
vascular disease. Psychosom Med. 2003;65(1):36–45.
 90. Gudmundsdottir H, Strand A, Hoieggen A, et al. Do screening blood pressure and plasma 
catecholamines predict development of hypertension? Twenty-year follow-up of middle-aged 
men. Blood Press. 2008;17(2):94–103.
 91. Egan BM. Neurohumoral, hemodynamic and microvascular changes as mechanisms of insu-
lin resistance in hypertension: a provocative but partial picture. Int J Obes. 1991;15(Suppl 
2):133–9.
 92. Mancia G, Grassi G, Giannattasio C, Seravalle G. Sympathetic activation in the pathogenesis 
of hypertension and progression of organ damage. Hypertension. 1999;34(4 Pt 2):724–8.
 93. Treiber FA, Kamarck T, Schneiderman N, Sheffield D, Kapuku G, Taylor T. Cardiovascular 
reactivity and development of preclinical and clinical disease states. Psychosom Med. 
2003;65(1):46–62.
 94. Julius S, Li Y , Brant D, Krause L, Buda AJ. Neurogenic pressor episodes fail to cause hyper -
tension, but do induce cardiac hypertrophy. Hypertension. 1989;13(5):422–9.
 95. Anderson DE, Kearns WD, Better WE. Progressive hypertension in dogs by avoidance con-
ditioning and saline infusion. Hypertension. 1983;5(3):286–91.
 96. Folkow B.  Pathophysiology of hypertension: differences between young and elderly. J 
Hypertens Suppl. 1993;11(4):S21–4.
 97. Rahn KH, Barenbrock M, Hausberg M. The sympathetic nervous system in the pathogenesis 
of hypertension. J Hypertens Suppl. 1999;17(3):S11–4.
 98. Kahn BB, Flier JS. Obesity and insulin resistance. J Clin Invest. 2000;106(4):473–81.
 99. Ross AE, Flaa A, Hoieggen A, Reims H, Eide IK, Kjeldsen SE. Gender specific sympathetic 
and hemorrheological responses to mental stress in healthy young subjects. Scand Cardiovasc 
J. 2001;35(5):307–12.
 100. Reims HM, Sevre K, Hoieggen A, Fossum E, Eide I, Kjeldsen SE. Blood viscosity: effects 
of mental stress and relations to autonomic nervous system function and insulin sensitivity. 
Blood Press. 2005;14(3):159–69.
 101. Esler M, Lambert G, Brunner-La Rocca HP, Vaddadi G, Kaye D. Sympathetic nerve activity 
and neurotransmitter release in humans: translation from pathophysiology into clinical prac-
tice. Acta Physiol Scand. 2003;177(3):275–84.
 102. Lohse MJ. Molecular mechanisms of membrane receptor desensitization. Biochim Biophys 
Acta. 1993;1179(2):171–88.
 103. Hausdorff WP, Caron MG, Lefkowitz RJ.  Turning off the signal: desensitization of beta-
adrenergic receptor function. FASEB J. 1990;4(11):2881–9.
 104. Julius S, Valentini M, Palatini P. Overweight and hypertension: A 2-way street? Hypertension. 
2000;35(3):807–13.
 105. Seals DR, Bell C. Chronic sympathetic activation: consequence and cause of age-associated 
obesity? Diabetes. 2004;53(2):276–84.
 106. Shibao C, Gamboa A, Diedrich A, et al. Autonomic contribution to blood pressure and metab-
olism in obesity. Hypertension. 2007;49(1):27–33.
 107. Reims HM, Hoieggen A, Fossum E, Rostrup M, Eide I, Kjeldsen SE.  Glucose disposal 
rates calculated from 60- to 90-minute isoglycemic hyperinsulinemic glucose clamp cor -
relate with cardiovascular risk factors in borderline hypertensive young men. Metabolism. 
2001;50(10):1175–80.
 108. Nonogaki K.  New insights into sympathetic regulation of glucose and fat metabolism. 
Diabetologia. 2000;43(5):533–49.
 109. Natali A, Santoro D, Palombo C, Cerri M, Ghione S, Ferrannini E. Impaired insulin action on 
skeletal muscle metabolism in essential hypertension. Hypertension. 1991;17(2):170–8.
 110. Grassi G, Dell'Oro R, Facchini A, Quarti TF, Bolla GB, Mancia G. Effect of central and 
peripheral body fat distribution on sympathetic and baroreflex function in obese normoten-
sives. J Hypertens. 2004;22(12):2363–9.
 111. Hamburg S, Hendler R, Sherwin RS. Influence of small increments of epinephrine on glucose 
tolerance in normal humans. Ann Intern Med. 1980;93(4):566–8.
A. Flaa et al.525
 112. Zeman RJ, Ludemann R, Easton TG, Etlinger JD. Slow to fast alterations in skeletal muscle 
fibers caused by clenbuterol, a beta 2-receptor agonist. Am J Phys. 1988;254(6 Pt 1):E726–32.
 113. Cohn JN. Relationship of plasma volume changes to resistance and capacitance vessel effects 
of sympathomimetic amines and angiotensin in man. Clin Sci. 1966;30(2):267–78.
 114. Hoieggen A, Fossum E, Moan A, Enger E, Kjeldsen SE. Whole-blood viscosity and the insu-
lin-resistance syndrome. J Hypertens. 1998;16(2):203–10.
 115. Hoieggen A, Fossum E, Nesbitt SD, Palmieri V , Kjeldsen SE. Blood viscosity, plasma adren-
aline and fasting insulin in hypertensive patients with left ventricular hypertrophy. ICARUS, 
a LIFE Substudy. Insulin CARotids US Scandinavica. Blood Press. 2000;9(2–3):83–90.
 116. Hassellund SS, Flaa A, Sandvik L, Kjeldsen SE, Rostrup M. Long-term stability of cardiovas-
cular and catecholamine responses to stress tests: an 18-year follow-up study. Hypertension. 
2010;55:131–6.33 Sympathoadrenal Reactivity to Stress as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Risk FactorsPart V
End Organ Damage in Prehypertension529 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_34
A. Jelaković · M. Laganović  
Department of Nephrology, Hypertension, Dialysis and Transplantation,  
University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
Ž. Dika · B. Jelaković ( *)
Department of Nephrology, Hypertension, Dialysis and Transplantation, School of Medicine, 
University of Zagreb, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia 
V . Herceg-Čavrak 
Pediatric Clinic, Zagreb, Croatia 
D. Lović 
Clinic for Internal Medicine, Intermedica, Niš, Serbia34Early Cardiovascular Dysfunction 
in Prehypertension
Ana Jelaković, Živka Dika, Vesna Herceg-Čavrak, 
Mario Laganović, Dragan Lović, and Bojan Jelaković
Prehypertension (PHT) is starting point in cardiovascular (CV) continuum and it 
should be considered as an intermediate phenotype between apparently health sub-
jects and patients with sustained hypertension (HT). Although PHT in general is 
associated with higher risk for CV , cerebrovascular and renal morbidity and mortal-
ity, it is a heterogeneous group and subjects with PHT differ in mechanisms and 
pathways as well as in natural history, presence of CV dysfunction and risk classifi-
cation (Fig.  34.1). It is of scientific interest but also of utmost pragmatical impor -
tance to identify PHT individuals with higher CV risk who are more likely to 
progress and who will mostly benefit from early interventions. Beside identification 
of different associated risk factors which cluster in PHT, for risk classification it is 
important to determine presence of subclinical target organ damages (TOD) and 
early CV dysfunction. Occurrence and characteristics of various early CV dysfunc-
tions as well as differences in early CV dysfunction among age groups are presented 
and discussed in this chapter.530
34.1  Changes in Systemic Hemodynamics  
and Arterial Stiffness
It was previously established that early stages of PHT are characterized with eleva-
tion of adrenergic tone typically evident by hyperkinetic status, i.e., increased heart 
rate (HR), cardiac volume (CV), cardiac output (CO), and cardiac index (CI), includ-
ing total peripheral resistance (TPR) [1 ]. In studies presented in Table  34.1 HR was 
reported to be higher in PHT than in normotensives (NT) by most of the authors. 
Negative results were found in studies which enrolled small number of participants, 
in subjects from African descents and in older PHT. In all of studies pulse pressure 
(PP) was higher in PHT compared to NT counterparts. In the young- to- middle PHT 
(average age 43.2) Yano et al. observed higher systemic vascular resistance com-
pared to NT, but no differences in left ventricular stroke volume. Interestingly, some 
racial differences were reported [2 ]. In the study conducted by Zhu et al., CO and CI 
were higher in American black youth PHT, while TPR, HR, and foot-pulse wave 
velocity (PWV) were higher in American white youth PHT [3 ]. Authors suggested 
that CV characteristics of PHT might be race-dependent proposing that PHT in 
young whites may be neurogenic, largely driven by excessive sympathetic tone while 
the observation that CO was increased in black PHT subjects could indicate the con-
tribution of extracellular volume expansion indicating that PHT in black youth might 
be associated with salt sensitivity and sodium retention. In the Strong study Drukteinis 
et al. reported that TPR was higher in both the HT and PHT groups compared to NT 
but after adjustments the difference remained significant in only the HT group [4 ]. 
Abdelhammed et al. have evaluated hemodynamic characteristics of adult subjects Blood pressureGenes
Ageing
Visceral
obesity
Dyslipidemia
Hyperglycemia
SmokingEndothelial 
dysfunction
Systemic vascular
resistanceHigh 
blood pressure
Increased cIMT
Widened pulse
pressureStroke
Coronary
Heart
Disease
Chronic 
Kidney 
Disease
Peripheral
Artery
Disease
Heart
failurePulse wave velocity
Retinal changes
Albuminuria
Insulin
resistance
Left ventricular
mass
Left ventricular 
hypertrophy
Cardiac 
remodelingArterial stiffness
Increased 
cardiac outputIncreased 
heart rate
High
blood pressureAutonomic
nervous
system
dysfunctionStructural alterations 
-vascular remodeling
Oxidative
stress
Fig. 34.1 Associated risk factors, general mechanisms, early cardiovascular dysfunction, and 
natural history in prehypertension
J. Ana et al.531
with and without hypertension (HT), including those with PHT using impedance 
cardiography [5 ]. They found no difference in systemic vascular resistance index 
(SVRI  =  SVR  ×  BSA) between PHT and subjects with optimal blood pressure 
(OBP), as well as between PHT and those with controlled HT (<120/80 mm Hg). A 
total of 22.2% of subjects with OBP and 50.0% of PHT showed vasoconstriction, as 
evidenced by high SVRI values. In HT group only 8.9% of subjects had SVRI in the 
normal range. As suggested by the authors, the transition from the normal state to the 
HT state may be bimodal among individuals with PHT—a group in which some 
individuals have elevated CO with low-to- normal SVR, whereas others have elevated 
SVR with low or normal CO. Subjects with PHT had a significantly lower total arte-
rial compliance index (TACI = stroke index (SI)/pulse pressure (PP)) than those with 
OBP, while no difference was observed in SVRI between these groups.
Table 34.1 Association of early cardiovascular disease markers with prehypertension in children, 
adolescents, adults, and elderly
Early cardiovascular disease 
markers Children and adolescents Adults and elderly
Endothelial dysfunction No evidence Positive
Retinal changes No association/negative Positive
Blood pressure
Albuminuria Negative Positive
Blood pressure
+
Associated clustered risk factors
(glycemia, uric acid, obesity)
Arterial stiffness Positive
Blood pressurePositive
Blood pressure
+
Associated clustered risk factors
(age, dyslipidemia)
Carotid intima-media-thickness Positive
Blood pressure
+
ObesityPositive
Blood pressure
+
Associated clustered risk factors
(men, dyslipidemia, morning BP 
surge)
Left ventricle
Structure and geometryPositive
Blood pressure
+
ObesityPositive
Blood pressure
+
Associated clustered risk factors
(insulin resistance)
Left ventricle
Diastolic dysfunctionPositive
Blood pressure
+
Associated clustered risk 
factorsPositive
Blood pressure
+
Associated clustered risk factors
Left ventricle
Systolic dysfunctionNo association Negative/positivea
Blood pressure
+
Metabolic abnormalities
aDepending on imagining technique34 Early Cardiovascular Dysfunction in Prehypertension532
The association of arterial stiffness with increased CV risk in PHT has not yet been 
fully clarified. Increased arterial stiffness was observed already in adolescents and 
children. Adolescents with HT and PHT have stiffer blood vessels and higher PWV 
than NT [6 –10]. Stabouli et al. reported in the study of 124 children and adolescents 
5–18 years of age that 24 h ABPM, daytime and nighttime PP levels were signifi-
cantly higher in PHT and HT than in NT subjects [7 ]. It was proposed that increased 
aortic stiffness in children with high BP in the early stage could be explained by pas-
sive distension caused by arterial pressure and not primarily with intrinsic arterial wall 
changes [8 ]. Urbina et al. reported a graded increase in carotid- femoral PWV from 
NT to PHT and to HT youth aged 10–23 years (5.75 vs. 6.38 vs. 7.12 m/s) after adjust-
ing for other CV risk factors [9 ]. A similar finding of a gradual increase in PWV in 
HT, PHT (high-normal BP) and HT children was also confirmed by Lurbe et al. in a 
group of children aged 8–18 [10]. In a twin cohort study of American youth (mean age 
17.6) from Georgia Cardiovascular twin study, Zhu et al. found significant elevation 
of carotid-to-radial PWV and carotid-to-foot PWV from NT to PHT subjects after 
adjusting for age, gender, and BMI in white youths [3 ]. Garcia-Espinosa et al. ana-
lyzed vascular phenotype in 154 children (mean age 11; range 4–16  years) and 
observed that children with high BP exhibited higher aortic PWV , but the differences 
between NT and HT withdrew when normalizing for the BP levels and concluded that 
the differences are pressure-dependent and not related to early intrinsic aortic damage 
[8]. One large study in adolescents (10—23 years) showed a graded increase in AIx 
from NT to PHT and to HT (0.69 vs. 3.89 vs. 9.35%; p  < 0.0001), even after adjusting 
for traditional CV risk factors [9 ]. On the contrary, in another survey of 121 adoles-
cents 13–19 years of age no difference was found in AIx among the three BP catego-
ries, nor any significant correlation between AIx and peripheral SBP or DBP [11]. 
Authors explained this by shorter cumulative exposure to higher BP in adolescents as 
compared with adults. Drukteinis et al. reported higher pulse pressure/stroke volume 
index (assumed as markers of arterial stiffness) in a group of young PHT compared to 
NT [4 ]. In The San Antonio Heart Study Lorenzo et al. demonstrated that PHT is an 
independent predictor of all-cause and CV mortality in subjects free of diabetes and 
CV disease, but only if PP was widened [12]. PHT was not a risk factor for mortality 
if PP was narrow. They proposed that widened PP may select a group of individuals 
who are more susceptible to generalized vascular damage and atherosclerosis. Gedikli 
et al. found aortic PWV (10 ± 2.5 vs. 8.6 ± 1.7 m/s, p  = 0.004) and AIx@75 (21 ± 8.3 
vs. 10 ± 9.1%, p  = 0.0001) to be significantly higher in subjects with PHT than in NT 
[13]. In multiple linear regression analysis PHT was a significant predictor of aortic 
PWV (b  = 0.26, p = 0.009) and AIx@75 (b  = 0.46, p = 0.0001), suggesting that arterial 
functions were impaired in PHT. In a group of 1349 PHT (mean age 44 ± 9 years)after 
adjustments for confounding variables (age, gender, and mean blood pressure) the 
brachial-ankle PWV , but not the radial AI, was higher in subjects with PHT than in NT 
[14]. PWV and BMI > 25 were identified as significant predictors of the development 
of HT. These results suggested that increased arterial stiffness of the large to middle-
sized arteries might be an independent risk factor for the new onset of HT in subjects 
with PHT. This is in line with results of Najjar et al. who demonstrated that a higher 
value of the carotid-femoral PWV was an independent risk factor for the new onset of 
J. Ana et al.533
HT in 306 NT subjects [15]. In another analysis Tomiyama et al. revealed that the 
change of the brachial-ankle PWV during the follow-up period of 6 years was higher 
in the subjects with persistent PHT than in persistent NT and they concluded that PHT 
itself is a risk factor for increase of the arterial stiffness [16]. The annual increase of 
the brachial ankle PWV in elderly subjects (age > 60 years) with persistent PHT was 
higher than that in middle-aged subjects (age 40–59 years) with persistent PHT indi-
cating that the accelerated progression of arterial stiffening caused by persistent PHT 
became more pronounced with advancing age. They observed that other CV risk fac-
tors may also augment the PHT-related progression of arterial stiffness. In a small 
group of young PHT men (mean age 34 years) Celik et al. observed that the mean 
aortic systolic and diastolic diameters of PHT were significantly higher than those in 
NT [17]. Aortic distensibility and strain indexes of PHT were found to be lower than 
those of NT while the mean aortic stiffness index beta of the PHT was significantly 
higher than that of the control group. Authors concluded that these findings suggested 
that arterial stiffness may develop prior to development of overt HT and increased 
arterial stiffness might be a mechanism in the initiation and/or progression of PHT to 
HT. Erdogan et al. demonstrated in the group of 60 PHT (mean age 43.6) that aortic 
distensibility was significantly lower and aortic stiffness index was significantly 
higher in both PHT and HT than those in NT and found impairment of aortic elasticity 
in PHT to be as severely as that in HT [18]. Authors concluded that the presence of 
PHT was significant predictor of impaired aortic elasticity. Proximal aortic impedance 
(Zc) and aortic PWV were higher in PHT compared to NT while aortic compliance 
and distensibility were lower [2 , 19]. Jia et al. even proposed that early detection of 
ascending aortic elasticity index changes, particularly aortic distensibility could be 
used for identification of high-risk PHT subjects [19]. Tiokka et al. also found lower 
aortic and carotid distensibilities in the PHT men (high-normal BP) than in NT [20]. 
In multivariate analysis, the differences in distensibilities between the groups disap-
peared when the values were adjusted for ox-LDL, thus they suggested that oxidative 
modification of LDL particles may play a pathophysiological role in the development 
of reduced arterial distensibility in HT.
Box 34.1 Arterial Stiffness as an Early Marker of Cardiovascular  
Dysfunction in PHT
1.  Markers of arterial stiffness (pulse pressure, pulse wave velocity) are 
reported to be increased already in PHT children and adolescents. Widened 
pulse pressure may be considered as a biomarker of greater susceptibility 
to general vascular damage in PHT.
2.  It was proposed that increased arterial stiffness in younger ages is blood pres-
sure dependent and not related to early intrinsic changes in arterial wall.
3.  Accelerating progression of arterial stiffness caused by persistent PHT is 
more pronounced with increasing aging. The role of other factors (age, 
glycemia, dyslipidemia) contributes to vascular wall changes.34 Early Cardiovascular Dysfunction in Prehypertension534
34.2  Carotid Intima Media Thickness
It was demonstrated that carotid intima-to-media thickness (cIMT) is increased in 
subjects with borderline hypertension [2, 21], and some recent reports showed that 
PHT is also associated with increased cIMT.  During childhood and adolescence 
cIMT correlates with age and with the increase in BP [22]. Most of these studies 
suggested an independent positive association between BP and cIMT in children 
and young people, even after adjustment for other CV risk factors. The correlation 
of PHT in children and adolescents and increased cIMT was observed in several 
studies. Urbina et al. presented an increased cIMT in PHT children and adolescents 
compared to the NT as independent determinant of target organ damage (TOD) [9]. 
Jourdan et al. reported thicker carotid and femoral IMT in young people who had 
systolic BP in the top 10th percentile of the distribution [23]. Stabouli et al. reported 
that obese children and adolescents have greater cIMT than nonobese subjects, 
independently of BP [24]. However, it is not clear whether higher cIMT values in 
PHT and HT children are of any clinical significance in adulthood. Manios et al. 
found that adult PHT and NT did not differ in common artery cIMT, but PHT with 
masked HT had higher cIMT than NT but also than PHT with normal daytime 
ABPM [25]. Alpaydin et al. reported that male gender, elevated mean platelet vol-
ume levels, and morning BP surge were independent predictors of greater cIMT in 
PHT [26]. Beside showing association of PHT with cIMT observations in both stud-
ies stressed the role of ABPM in determination of risk in PHT. According to the 
results of Hong et al. PHT correlated with thicker cIMT after adjustment for multi-
ple risk factors. PHT had trend to have thicker cIMT but also significantly higher 
carotid plaque occurrence than NT [27]. Intensity of plaque formation in PHT was 
the same as in HT patients. In the PHT group they fail to observe any difference 
between subjects with high and high-normal BP. It was also reported that PHT sub-
jects with thicker cIMT have also higher LVM than NT indicating that PHT increase 
risk for atherosclerosis and global CV risk [28]. The Multi-Ethnic Study of 4.  PWV was identified as a significant predictor of the development of HT 
and arterial stiffness might be an independent risk factor development of 
overt HT.
5.  It was proposed that widened pulse pressure and changes of aortic elastic-
ity properties could be used for identification of high-risk subgroup of 
PHT subjects.
Gradual increase in arterial stiffness was observed from NT to PHT and 
HT. Further research is needed to clarify the chicken-egg question whether 
increased arterial stiffness is risk factor for PHT, or does PHT independently 
increases arterial stiffness. Nevertheless, it could be concluded that measure-
ments of biomarkers of arterial stiffness (PP, carotid-femoral PWV , etc.) are 
valuable in identification of PHT subjects with higher CV risk.
J. Ana et al.535
Atherosclerosis (MESA) enrolled 6814 participants free of clinical cardiovascular 
disease and it was shown that in the group with high-normal BP cIMT was directly 
associated with systolic BP and inversely associated with diastolic BP, while LVM 
was directly related to SBP and DBP [29]. Karasek et al. analyzed dyslipidemic 
status in PHT and found that prevalence of PHT was the highest in hypertriglyceri-
demic persons [30]. In their study PHT subjects had thicker cIMT than NT in all 
dyslipidemic phenotypes (according to apolipoprotein B and triglycerides) suggest-
ing that dyslipidemia and BP have cumulative effect on IMT in PHT. Femia et al. 
confirmed that PHT have thicker cIMT compared to NT, and the association between 
cIMT and PHT persists after adjustment for all known predictors [31]. However, in 
the follow-up period of 3.5 years they failed to observe difference in progression of 
cIMT between PHT and NT.  Authors concluded that baseline measurements of 
cIMT reflects past log-term exposure to risk factors, whereas cIMT progression 
may be influenced by short-term changes in risk factor burden.
34.3  Retinal Changes
Alternations in the structure and function of the microcirculation are one of the earli-
est changes in the pathogenesis of HT including enhanced vasoconstriction, reduced 
vasodilator responses, anatomic alterations, and rarefaction of arterioles or capillar -
ies. Results of studies based on biopsies usually taken from subcutaneous fat tissue 
support the hypothesis that capillary rarefaction is an early hallmark of HT. Recently, 
new techniques and technologies in retinal photography have enabled investigations 
of microvascular structure and function in retina. Retinal vascular caliber can be 
noninvasively assessed from retinal photographs and computer- assisted approaches 
[32] . The noninvasive measurement of retinal vessel diameters of particular rele-
vance are: the central retinal arteriolar equivalent (CRAE) and central retinal venular 
equivalent (CRVE), which, respectively, represent the average arteriolar and venular 
diameters in an eye. Noninvasive photographic measurement of retinal vessel diam-
eters allows insights into microvascular alterations and their relation to CV risk fac-
tors [33– 35]. Retinal arteriolar narrowing is strongly correlated with concurrent Box 34.2 Prehypertension and Carotid Intima-Media Thickness
1.  Most of studies showed an independent positive association between PHT 
and cIMT starting from childhood and adolescence till the older ages.
2.  In PHT other risk factors (i.e., dyslipidemia, morning BP surge, masked 
HT) additionally increase risk for thicker cIMT.
3.  Presence of cIMT is associated with other target organ damages (i.e., LVH)
4.  In addition to the presence of thicker cIMT it was also reported that inten-
sity of atherosclerotic plaque formation in PHT is not different to HT.
Thicker cIMT is reported to be associated with PHT and could be consid-
ered as a determinant of early target organ damage.34 Early Cardiovascular Dysfunction in Prehypertension536
elevated BP levels, but retinal venular diameter may convey additional information. 
In some studies, NT persons with retinal arteriolar narrowing were more likely to 
develop HT. Increasing number of studies have shown that retinal vessel signs, that 
is, the narrowing of retinal arteriolar caliber and widening of venular caliber, have 
been associated with CV risk factors, systemic inflammation, and decreased renal 
function [36– 39]. It has been suggested that generalized and focal narrowing of the 
retinal arterioles may be markers of a PHT because they predict the risk of HT in NT 
subjects [34, 40, 41]. The PHT group in the study by Murgan et al. had values of the 
CRAE equivalent to those of the HT group and significantly lower than those of the 
NT group [11]. Using qualitative and quantitative assessments of the retinal micro-
circulatory network via bilateral nonmydriatic retinography Grassi et al. found arte-
riolar-venular ratio in PHT to be below the normal values, i.e., greater than 0.92, 
indicating occurrence of an initial arteriolar narrowing process in the high-normal 
BP group [42]. They concluded that retinal arteriolar narrowing is an early phenom-
enon in PHT, and systolic BP and PP represent the major hemodynamic determinants 
of the retinal abnormalities in PHT. In the study of Murgan et al. no correlation was 
found of the retinal vascular parameters and the macrovascular parameter AIx in 
contrast to the findings of the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study (ARIC) 
study, in which carotid arterial stiffness was strongly correlated with generalized reti-
nal arteriolar narrowing [43]. The recent study in HT and PHT adolescents has shown 
negative correlation between CRAE and both peripheral (brachial) and central SBP, 
while no correlation was found in CRVE with BP [11]. This is consistent with the 
findings in studies of young adults and of small children, in which high BP had no 
influence on retinal venular diameter [40, 44, 45]. The plausible explanation of these 
findings could be the short cumulative exposure of the children and adolescents to 
high BP and the fact that the changes in vascular elasticity and pulse wave reflection 
that occur in HT occur at a later stage than does retinal arteriolar narrowing [46]. On 
the basis of baseline and the follow-up SBP measurements, each 20-μ m decrease on 
retinal arteriolar caliber at baseline was associated with a 1.12 mmHg greater increase 
in SBP over 5  years [47]. Further, in Nagahama study the central BP was more 
closely associated with the narrowing of retinal arterioles (CRAE) than brachial BP, 
even in NT.
Box 34.3 Retinal Changes as an Early Marker of Cardiovascular Dysfunction  
in PHT
1.  There is scarce evidence on retinal changes in PHT, however it was sug-
gested that generalized and focal narrowing of the retinal arterioles may be 
early phenomenons and a markers of PHT because they predict the risk of 
HT in NT subjects.
2.  It was reported that systolic BP and PP in PHT represent the major hemo-
dynamic determinants of the retinal abnormalities, i.e., arteriolar 
narrowing.
J. Ana et al.537
34.4  Albuminuria as an Early Marker of Cardiovascular 
Dysfunction in PHT
It is well established that microalbuminuria (MA), which is considered a mirror of 
generalized endothelial damage, represents a marker not only of chronic kidney 
disease (CKD) but also of CV morbidity and mortality in diabetic patients, hyper -
tensives nondiabetic and in general population [48]. MA is a useful test for the 
identification of people who are at high risk for CV events and who require more 
intensive therapy. Endothelial injury and dysfunction are thought to contribute to 
CV risk in PHT.  Weil et  al. reported on significantly lower forearm blood flow 
responses to acetylcholine (~30%) in PHT compared with NT and concluded that 
PHT is associated with impaired NO-mediated endothelium-dependent vasodilation 
[49]. Wang et al. observed association of elevated CRP and sICAM-1 with PHT 
suggesting that inflammation and endothelial dysfunction may have a role in the 
development of PHT and HT [50]. Nikolov et al. found that flow-mediated dilata-
tion was reduced in PHT compared to NT group which was associated with increased 
ADMA and cVCAM-1 [51]. Vrdoljak, Jelaković et al. in a group of PHT who were 
free of CKD, diabetes, and previous CV incidents found that hepatocyte growth fac-
tor was significantly higher in subjects with high-normal BP than in those with OBP 
[52]. Hepatocyte growth factor which has antiapoptotic, anti-inflammatory, and 
antifibrotic properties was reported to be compensatory elevated in response to 
endothelial damage caused by HT, CKD, or diabetes. Keeping in mind high preva-
lence of PHT and the fact that PHT is very heterogenous group, it is of interest and 
importance to determine whether MA, as not only a marker of early kidney damage 
but also sign of systemic endothelial injury, can be used as a screening tool in adults 
with PHT to identify those at higher risk for CV disease or decline of renal function. 
It was observed in a NHANES III cohort (8751 non-hypertensive subjects) that 
high-normal BP and normal BP categories were significantly associated with 
increased OR of MA compared with OBP (OR  =  2.13; 1.34, respectively) [53]. 
Analyzing NHANES data Ogunniyi et al. found that prevalence of MA was 4.5, 6.3, 
12.4, and 25.3% in subjects with normal BP, PHT, stage 1 HT, and stage 2 HT, 
respectively [54]. In the group of middle-aged untreated subjects without diabetes 3.  Retinal vascular parameters do not correlate with the macrovascular 
parameter (i.e., Aix) what is in line with the fact that the changes in 
vascular elasticity of large arteries and pulse wave reflection occur at a 
later stage than does retinal arteriolar narrowing.
4.  Negative correlation of retinal changes with BP was found in PHT ado-
lescents and these findings could be due to the short cumulative expo-
sure of the children and adolescents to high BP.
Obtained results suggest that retinal changes in PHT might be considered 
as an early sign of cardiovascular dysfunction, but further studies are needed.34 Early Cardiovascular Dysfunction in Prehypertension538
Tenekecioglu et al. observed the prevalence of MA to be 10, 25.9, and 33.9% in NT, 
PHT, and new-HT, respectively [55]. In PHT group subjects with MA had higher 
SBP, brain natriuretic peptide, LVMI and lower eGFR as compared to those with 
normal albumin excretion. In PHT MA was significantly correlated with SBP, 
LVMI, and brain natriuretic peptide. Vrdoljak, Jelaković et al. also found albumin- 
to- creatinine ratio (ACR) to have linear trend accords the BP categories being 4.08, 
4.25, 5.05, and 5.77 mg/g in OBP, normal BP, high-normal BP, and untreated new-
 HT, respectively [52]. Kim et al. analyzed 2678 PHT subjects without a history of 
diabetes or hypertension and found that high-normal BP category had an indepen-
dently significant association with MA (OR 1.692, 95% CI 1.097–2.611) [56]. 
Subjects with high-normal BP had higher ACR values than subjects with normal BP 
(11.06 ± 25.46 vs. 8.15 ± 20.43; p = 0.006). They suggested that the high prevalence 
of MA in the high-normal BP group with apparent normal renal function may reflect 
increased glomerular filtration pressure in response to elevated BP. In the group of 
6771 subjects without diabetes and HT Lee et al. found MA in 4.0% of NT subjects 
and in 7.9% of PHT [57]. PHT subjects with MA had higher serum uric acid level 
than those with normoalbuminuria (p = 0.006) what was not observed in the NT 
group. In this cohort increased serum uric acid level was an independent factor for 
MA in the PHT group. They found that PHT subjects with MA had higher GFR 
levels than those with normoalbuminuria proposing that PHT might cause endothe-
lial dysfunction and glomerular hypertension inducing glomerular hyperfiltration. 
In our group of non-treated subjects without diabetes and GFR > 60 ml/min preva-
lence of glomerular hyperfiltration was higher in PHT than in those with OBP and 
HT (25.5% vs. 21.8% vs. 18%, respectively) [52]. Subjects with glomerular hyper -
filtration were younger, visceral obese, and had signs of sympathetic overactivity 
(higher leptin concentration and heart rate). During the 100  months follow-up 
period eGFR decreased significantly more in subjects with glomerular hyperfiltra-
tion compared to those with normal eGFR. This is in line with report of Okada et al. 
who found that the prevalence of glomerular hyperfiltration increased not only with 
increasing stage of prediabetes but also of PHT [58]. In the group of 1100 PHT and 
2200 subjects with OBP Yi et al. found that prevalence of MA was 6.8% and 3.6%, 
respectively (p < 0.0001) [59]. In logistic regression it was shown that MA, brain 
natriuretic peptide, and serum uric level were significantly associated with the 
occurrence of PHT. After exclusion of patients with diabetes and hyperuricemia 
Peng et al. found in a group of subjects older than 30 years that persons with PHT 
are more likely to have MA than NT (OR 1.83 95% CI 1.12–2.99), and MA was 
positively associated with BP levels [60]. Ding et al. and Zhang et al. found that 
prevalence of MA in the group of 1796 women increases in parallel with BP cate-
gory being 9.6%, 13.4%, and 27.6%, respectively, in NT, PHT, and HT [61, 62]. 
They also noticed dose-response relationship between ACR and the risk of PHT. In 
middle-aged NT subjects (622 PHT and 437 OBP) Wang et al. reported that preva-
lence of MA is rising with the increasing classification of glycemic level: normo, 
prediabetic, and diabetic, 14.8%, 18.3%, and 32.6%, respectively [63]. Statistically 
significant association between glycemic level and MA was present in PHT but not 
J. Ana et al.539
in OBP group. Urinary albumin excretion has been also reported as a predictor of 
developing HT and BP progression. A prospective study of 1499 nondiabetic, non-
 HT individuals has demonstrated that those in the highest quartile of the ACR had 
an adjusted OR of 1.93 for developing HT and 1.45 for BP progression [64]. Authors 
concluded that elevated ACR is associated with the development of HT in nondia-
betic individuals who are not currently HT. Importantly, the increased risk of HT 
was evident at ACR values well below the conventional threshold for MA. Some 
authors failed to find MA in PHT subjects, but as authors themselves concluded this 
could be explained with younger age of subjects enrolled in those studies [4, 65]. 
During a median follow-up of 12.8  years Sehestedt et  al. found in a population 
sample of 1968 untreated individuals without diabetes, prior stroke, or myocardial 
infarction that measuring two of PWV , atherosclerotic plaques or ACR was suffi-
cient to significantly improve risk prediction in subjects with high-normal BP [66]. 
In our group of nondiabetic PHT with normal kidney function during the follow-up 
period of 100 months (IQ84–120), 11.337 person years of follow-up, incident HT 
was diagnosed in 48.2% of PHT with incident rate 7.53% per year. Beside age, 
systolic BP, and leptin, ACR was significant predictor of incident HT [67].
Aforementioned studies suggest that ACR might be a good biomarker and 
screening for MA may identify a subgroup of subjects who are at high risk for 
developing CV disease and renal impairment and could benefit from early therapy.
Box 34.4 Albuminuria as an Early Biomarker of Cardiovascular Dysfunction  
in PHT
1.  Prevalence of MA is higher in PHT than in subjects with OBP, but lower 
than in non-treated hypertensives.
2.  Subjects with PHT have higher risk for MA than those with normal BP.
3.  Association of MA with PHT is present in diabetics but also in 
nondiabetics.
4.  Prevalence of MA is increasing with the glycemic level.
5.  Serum uric acid was reported by some authors to influence presence of 
MA in PHT subjects.
6.  ACR is predictor of developing HT in nondiabetic PHT subjects.
7.  It was proposed that MA in PHT subjects with normal global renal func-
tion may reflect glomerular hyperfiltration.
It was also shown that renal function deteriorates more rapidly in PHT with 
glomerular hyperfiltration.
8.  Negative results were observed in children and adolescents what could be 
explained with shorter period of exposition to higher values of BP.
It could be suggested that MA might be considered as a tool for identifica-
tion of adult and elderly PHT subjects with additional high risk who may 
benefit from early treatment.34 Early Cardiovascular Dysfunction in Prehypertension540
34.5  Changes of Left Ventricular Structure and Geometry
LV mass (LVM) was significantly elevated in PHT starting from childhood and adoles-
cents [4 , 9, 68]. DiBello et al. analyzed LV abnormalities in PHT with 2D-strain ECHO 
and found that LVM was significantly higher in PHT [69]. Ahnet al. found that LVMI 
was higher in both PHT men and PHT women (p  = 0.02). Kim et al. evaluated the 
relationship between PHT and TOD using tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) and found 
that LVMI was significantly higher in PHT than in NT [71]. In the study conducted by 
Ahn et al. PHT subjects compared with NT had significantly higher Sokolow-Lyon and 
Cornell voltage for ECG left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) [70]. PHT had higher 
prevalence of ECG LVH (men 16.9% vs. 5.9% men; 2.0% vs. 1.0% women). Using 2D 
mode ECHO Jung et al. in much larger cohort found that the proportion of LVH was 
0.9%, 1.6%, 4.9%, and 3.4% in NT, PHT, controlled HT, and in newly diagnosed HT, 
respectively [72]. The fully adjusted ORs for LVH were 2.1 (95% CI 1.63–2.7) in all 
PHT, and 3.2 (95% CI 2.41–4.23) in nondiabetic PHT. In this study relative wall thick-
ness (RWT) showed dose- response relationship order (NT, PHT, HT). The full adjusted 
ORs of increased RWT were 1.65 (95% CI 1.45–1.87) in PHT and 3.31 (95% CI 
2.68–4.07) in newly diagnosed untreated HT. Changes in LV structure and geometry 
are registered already in children and adolescents with PHT [73– 75]. Stabouli et al. 
reported the same prevalence of LVH of 20% in HT and PHT children. PHT children 
had higher LVMI than NT and similar to HT [7 ]. The combination of obesity and PHT 
increases the likelihood of LVH, as we found in the study of Falkner et al. [76]. In the 
African- American adolescent prevalence of LVH was 19% and 57% in normal weight 
and overweight adolescents, respectively. In PHT children, adolescents, and young 
adults (age range 10–23) Urbina et al. found no difference in concentric HT between 
PHT vs. NT while eccentric hypertrophy was slightly more prevalent (4.6 vs. 3.4%) 
[9]. It was found in the Strong study in young PHT (14–39 years of age) that after 
adjustment for covariates, both HT and PHT subjects had higher LV wall thickness 
(0.83 and 0.78 vs. 0.72 cm), LVM (182 and 161 vs. 137 g), and RWT (0.30 and 0.29 
vs. 0.28 cm) and three- and twofold higher prevalence of LVH than their NT counter -
parts (all p  < 0.001) [4 ]. They found minimally higher prevalence of concentric remod-
eling and threefold and twofold higher prevalence of eccentric LVH in the HT and PHT 
groups, respectively. In another study, it was found that PHT men and women have 
changes in LV geometry in the form of concentric remodeling (3.44 and 6.45%), 
eccentric hypertrophy (3.44 and 3.22%), and concentric hypertrophy (13.79 and 6.4%) 
[68]. In the same group posterior wall thickness (PWT), interventricular septum thick-
ness (IVST), LVM, and RWT were raised but not statistically significant in both PHT 
men and women. Erdogan et al. found that IVS and PW thickness, left ventricular end-
diastolic diameter (LVEDD), left ventricular end- systolic diameter (LVESD), ejection 
fraction (EF), left atrial (LA) diameter, and LVMI were similar between PHT and HT, 
and between PHT and NT [18]. This is in line with results from the study by Norton 
et al. who enrolled young-to-middle-aged subjects of African ancestry [65]. Before 
adjustment PHT was associated with LVMI, mean WT, PWV , early to late transmitral 
velocity, but not with other TOD (ACR, cIMT). However, after adjustments PHT was 
not independently associated with any TOD. Authors speculated that alternative risk 
factors may contribute to TOD and proposed that is possible that clustering of risk 
J. Ana et al.541
factors is principally responsible for TOD in PHT. On the contrary, Drukteinis et al. 
concluded that both the HT and PHT groups exhibited cardiac structural features asso-
ciated with increased CV risk, including increased IVS, posterior wall, and RWT and 
higher LVM underlying that these data suggest parallels between CV effects of PHT 
and HT already in adolescents and young adults [4 ]. This is in agreement with observa-
tion and conclusion of Kim et al. who found that subtle alterations in CV structure were 
present in PHT [71]. As assessed by TDI-derived parameters, LV diastolic dysfunction 
appears to be an early manifestation of PHT subjects and precedes the development of 
LVH defined by current ECHO criteria indicating that PHT might be a potential con-
tributor to the development of TOD. DiBello et al. demonstrated that PHT induces the 
same structural abnormalities of newly diagnosed, untreated HT patients, although in a 
milder manner [69]. However, they also found LV abnormalities to be associated not 
only with systolic ABPM and LVM but also with HOMA index. In elderly PHT, men 
had higher LV dimensions and LV wall thickness, while LVMI was similar to women. 
The LV filling pressure (E/E′ ) was higher in women. In PHT, the gender differences in 
cardiac structure were consistent with the constitutional differences between sexes and 
the higher filling pressure in women was similar to the findings in general population 
that may contribute to increased prevalence of Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection 
Fraction in women. Important and interesting data were collected in the 10-year fol-
low-up study (MONICA/KORA Augsburg) where Markus et al. found that PHT dis-
played more pronounced aging-related increase in LV wall thickness and LV mass 
[77]. In addition, PHT was associated with a raised incidence of LV concentric remod-
eling (adjusted OR 10.7 CI 95% 2.82–40.4) and LVH (adjusted OR 5.3 CI 95% 
1.58–17.9).
Box 34.5 Changes of Left Ventricular Structure and Geometry as an Early Sign  
of Cardiovascular Dysfunction in PHT
1.  Left ventricular mass is higher in PHT men and women than in NT 
counterparts.
2.  Changes in LV structure and geometry are presented already in PTH chil-
dren and adolescents.
3.  PHT subjects have two- to threefold higher risk and prevalence of LVH 
than NT.
4.  PHT subjects displayed more pronounced aging-related changes in LV 
structure than NT.
5.  PHT men were reported to have more eccentric and concentric hypertro-
phy, while PHT women had more concentric remodeling and higher LV 
filling pressure.
6.  Some authors argued that associated risk factors and not PHT itself are 
principally responsible for LV structural changes.
Regardless changes in LV structure are independently related to PHT or 
they are associated with other risk factors observed abnormalities in structure 
and geometry in PHT subjects are similar to those in newly diagnosed, 
untreated HT patients, although in a milder manner.34 Early Cardiovascular Dysfunction in Prehypertension542
34.6  Left Ventricular Diastolic Function
Data on left ventricular (LV) diastolic dysfunction in PHT are rare and there are just 
a few population-based studies on early changes in CV function. In the cohort of 
more than 52,000 adults in whom echocardiogram (ECHO) was performed Jung 
et al. found the presence of diastolic dysfunction in PHT. The adjusted mean E/E 
ratio, indicating increased filling pressure, was 7.89 (95% CI 7.85–7.94) in PHT 
who also had higher E/e ratio and LA diameter, while lower E/A ratio and septal e 
velocities [72]. This is accordant to the results of Bajpai et al. who observed active 
(E) and passive (A) transmitral peak velocities and their ratio (E/A ratio) to be 
decreased in PHT what is suggestive of compensatory diastolic dysfunction [68]. 
Ahn et al. reported that diastolic function was more decreased in PHT compared to 
NT (E/A men 1.14(0.6) vs. 1.3(0.4); women 1.11(0.6) vs. 1.25(0.5)) [70]. These 
results are in line with report of Celik et al. who found that PHT compared to NT 
had slower E velocity, faster A velocity, lower E/A ratio, longer deceleration time 
and IVRT (isovolumetric relaxation time) [17]. Using TDI (Tissue Doppler imag-
ing), Kim et al. found that LV diastolic parameters/E/E ratio, TDI Ea velocity, E/Es 
ratio were impaired in PHT subjects [71]. In a large cohort of 4261 middle-aged 
adults Jang et al. observed that diastolic dysfunction grade 1 or 2 was significantly 
higher in PHT (31%) and HT (38%) compared to NT (19.1%) [78]. In men, the 
adjusted OR for diastolic dysfunction with PHT was 1.74 (CI 95% 1.44–2.04) for 
grade 1 and 1.31(CI 95% 0.84–2.04) for grade 2, while in females it was 1.32 (CI 
95% 0.91–1.9) for grade 1 and 1.47(CI 95% 0.76–2.76) for grade 2. It was con-
cluded that diastolic dysfunction appears to be significantly associated with PHT in 
apparently healthy middle-aged Korean population. These results are congruent 
with data obtained with 2D-strain ECHO. DiBello et al. found mild LV diastolic 
dysfunction in PHT, higher LVEDV (left ventricle end-diastolic volume) in PHT 
than in NT [69]. They found early and global LV diastolic dysfunction: peak E was 
progressively lower in PHT and HT. However, late diastolic LV functional phase 
appeared comparable among groups (PHT, HT, NT). Only the early phase of longi-
tudinal function was impaired, essentially at the septum level. Prominently the E/e 
ratio showed a progressive and significant increase in PHT and HT compared to 
NT. It is interesting to analyze changes in LV function in various aging PHT sub-
groups. In the cohort of very young subjects (10–23 years) Urbina et al. found NT 
to be better than PHT for mitral E/A ratio, TDI Ea/Aa septal ratio, average septal/
lateral Ea/Aa ratios, and E/average Ea/Aa TDI lateral and septal ratios [9]. In the 
Strong study which enrolled participants 14–39 years of age, mean mitral A velocity 
and atrial filling fraction were higher and the mean mitral E/A ratio was lower in 
both HT and PHT participants, even after covariate adjustment, but difference in 
mitral deceleration time did not remain significant after covariate adjustment [4]. 
IVRT was longer and the mean E velocity was slightly lower in HT and PHT partici-
pants, but the differences were not significant after adjustment for covariates. In 
elderly PHT (75 years of age) Santos et al. found that parameters of diastolic func-
tion (E/A, E′, and E/E′) were progressively worse in PHT and HT in comparison to 
subjects with OBP, and the adjusted prevalence of mild and moderate to severe 
J. Ana et al.543
diastolic dysfunction was higher in PHT (59%) as compared with OBP (44%) but 
lower than in HT (67%) [79]. They observed a tendency toward increasing LA size 
with higher BP but they failed to find statistically significant difference in LA size 
between PHT participants and those with OBP. Some authors failed to find PHT to 
be independently associated with LV dysfunction. Erdogan et al. found that com-
pared to NT, PHT had significantly higher only IVRT, while the other diastolic 
parameters were just slightly different [18]. They concluded that LV diastolic func-
tion in PHT was not impaired as severely as that was in HT. In young-to-middle- 
aged PHT of African descent Norton et al. failed to prove PHT to be an independent 
predictor of TOD including diastolic dysfunction and suggested that early changes 
are largely attributed to associated risk factors that cluster with PHT [65]. However, 
in 10-year follow-up period Markus et al. observed that in subjects with persistent 
PHT the ratio of early and late diastolic peak transmitral flow velocities (E/A) 
decreased by 15.7% (compared to decrease of 7.7% in NT) [77]. The ratio of early 
diastolic peak myocardial relaxation velocities (E/EM) was higher and LA size was 
larger in PHT group. The adjusted OR for incident diastolic dysfunction was 2.52 
(1.01–6.31) for the PHT group.
34.7  Left Ventricular Systolic Function in PHT
Contrary to LV diastolic dysfunction the overall LV systolic functions were reported 
to be normal in asymptomatic PHT subjects [68]. Even in elderly PHT authors failed 
to find differences in LV systolic function in PHT compared to subjects with OBP 
[79]. In the elderly PHT enrolled in the ARIC study neither EF nor circumferential 
strain significantly differed between NT and HT, and authors speculated that systolic 
abnormalities restricted to the subendocardial fibers might be present only in a more Box 34.6 Left Ventricular Diastolic Dysfunction and PHT
1.  Diastolic function is more decreased in PHT than in NT, but not so severely 
as it was described in HT.
2.  Impaired diastolic function is present not only in middle-aged and elderly 
PHT but also in young PHT and even in children and adolescents, indicat-
ing that this is one of the earliest manifestation of cardiovascular dysfunc-
tion in PHT.
3.  In subjects with PHT compared to NT diastolic function decreased more 
rapidly.
4.  Although majority of authors found PHT to be independently associated 
with diastolic dysfunction, some authors suggested that observed changes 
are more likely attributed to associated risk factors which cluster with 
PHT.
Left ventricular diastolic dysfunction is an early and prominent sign of 
cardiovascular dysfunction in PHT.34 Early Cardiovascular Dysfunction in Prehypertension544
advanced HT status. In the Korean Genome study no statistically significant differ -
ences in LV systolic parameters, including EF and TDI systolic (Sa) velocity, were 
observed between PHT and NT [71]. Drukteinis et  al. found that circumferential 
end-systolic stress was significantly elevated in both young-to- middle- aged HT and 
PHT compared to NT, but the circumferential end-systolic stress/end-systolic vol-
ume index, a load-adjusted measure of chamber contractility, did not differ among 
groups after adjustment [4 ]. Interestingly, 2D longitudinal systolic strain appeared 
significantly lower both at mid septum and mid lateral level in PHT according to the 
results of DiBello et al. [69]. Longitudinal 2D strain rate at septum level confirmed a 
progressive impairment in PHT and HT compared to NT, both of systolic and dia-
stolic parameters. Instead, the radial and circumferential 2D systolic strain were 
comparable in all three groups and in all LV segments. Only longitudinal regional 
deformation (2D strain) appears altered in PHT and according to authors this could 
be related to an early abnormal systolic function limited to the subendocardial fibers. 
They observed the same even in PHT with normal LVMI.  Using MRI technique 
Sironi et  al. found that subjects with PHT as well as new-HT patients showed a 
graded reduction in systolic function, as documented by decreased LV shortening, 
despite normal ventricular volumes and pump function and similar values of wall 
stress [80]. The reduction in regional systolic function (LV circumferential shorten-
ing) was related to BP in a continuous fashion but as authors underlined, more inter -
estingly, to metabolic abnormalities such as increased epicardial and visceral fat 
accumulation, triglyceride concentration, and insulin resistance. LV shortening was 
reduced in PHT and new-HT patients in all 3 of the regions (basal, middle, and apical 
LV segments) as compared with a control group of NT. However, it was shown in 
10-year follow-up study that systolic function, contrary to diastolic function, did not 
display any substantial changes and Markus et al. suggested that this may indicate 
that persistent PHT does not affect contractility [77].
Box 34.7 Left Ventricular Systolic Function in PHT
1.  In PHT there are even fewer data on LV systolic function than on diastolic 
dysfunction.
2.  Using routine ECHO techniques LV systolic functions were reported by 
most of the authors to be normal in asymptomatic PHT subjects. It was 
observed even in elderly PHT subjects.
3.  Interestingly, using more sophisticated methods (2D strain ECHO, MRI) 
early changes in systolic dysfunction were found.
4.  Some authors raised the question whether PHT itself, i.e., BP values or 
metabolic abnormalities associated with PHT were significantly related to 
the reduction of LV systolic function in PHT.
Results on LV systolic dysfunction in PHT are controversial. More sophis-
ticated techniques found early systolic dysfunction but the question whether 
this is independently related to PHT or is influenced with clustered metabolic 
abnormalities is still opened.
J. Ana et al.545
Associations of early CV disease markers with PTH in children, adolescents, 
adults, and elderly are summarized in Table  34.2. In children and adolescents there 
is no evidence for endothelial dysfunction and lack of associations were observed 
between PHT and retinal changes, MA and left ventricle systolic dysfunction. BP is 
an independent risk factor for increased arterial stiffness, however, cIMT, changes 
in LV structure and geometry and LV dysfunction are attributed also to obesity and 
clustered risk factors. On the contrary, in adults and elderly there are data on posi-
tive association of endothelial dysfunction, retinal changes, and MA with PHT. Only 
retinal changes were reported to be independently associated with BP, while associ-
ated clustered risk factors were found, beside BP, to have impact on all other mark-
ers of early CV dysfunction. Proposed diagnostic tests for detection of early CV 
dysfunction are shown in Table  34.2. For risk stratification and planning interven-
tion strategies ECG and PWV should be considered in all age groups, while MA 
could add information only in adults and elderly. PWV and MA were reported to be 
not only biomarkers of TOD but also to have prognostic value [66]. All other test 
could be suggested if they are available or more indicated (for instance ECHO in 
subjects with ECG determined LVH).
Early CV dysfunction is frequently present in PHT and early detection and iden-
tification of those individuals who are at higher global risk could enable us to start 
with more targeted interventions prior to occurrence of overt disease and nonfatal or 
fatal CV events.
References
 1. Julius S, Nesbitt S. Sympathetic oveactivity in hypertension. A moving target. Am J Hypertens. 
1996;9:113S–20S.
 2. Yano Y , Neeland I, Ayers C, Peshock R, Berry J, Lloyd-Jones D, Greenland P, Mitchell G, 
V ongpatanasin W. Hemodynamic and mechanical properties of the proximal aorta in young and 
middle-aged adults with isolated systolic hypertension: the Dallas heart study. Hypertension. 
2017;70:158–65.
 3. Zhu H, Yan W, Ge D, Treiber FA, Harshfield GA, Kapuku G, Snieder H, Dong Y . Cardiovascular 
characteristics in American youth with prehypertension. Am J Hypertens. 2007;20:1051–7.
 4. Drukteinis J, Roman M, Fabsitz R, Lee E, Best L, Rusell M, Devereux R. Cardia and systemic 
hemodynamic characteristics of hypertension and prehypertension in adolescets and young 
adults.The Strong Heart Study. Circulation. 2007;15:221–7.Table 34.2 Proposed test for detection of early cardiovascular dysfunction in prehypertensive 
subjects
Children and adolescents Adults and elderly
Electrocardiogram Electrocardiogram
Pulse wave velocity Pulse wave velocity
Microalbuminuria
Ambulatory BP monitoring Ambulatory BP monitoring
Left ventricle ultrasound Left ventricle ultrasound
Carotid intima-media thickness Carotid intima-media thickness
Optic fundus photography34 Early Cardiovascular Dysfunction in Prehypertension546
 5. Abdelhammed I, Smith R, Levy P, Smits G, Ferrario C. Noninvasive hemodynamic profiles in 
hypertensive subjects. Am J Hypertens. 2005;18:51S–9S.
 6. Phillips AA, Chirico D, Coverdale NS, Fitzgibbon LK, Shoemaker JK, Wade TJ, Cairney J, 
O'Leary DD. The association between arterial properties and blood pressure in children. Appl 
Physiol Nutr Metab. 2015;40(1):72–8.
 7. Stabouli S, Kotsis V , Rizos Z, Toumanidis S, Karagianni C, Constantopoulos A, Zakopoulos 
N. Left ventricular mass in normotensive, prehypertensive and hypertensive children and ado-
lescents. Pediatr Nephrol. 2009;24(8):1545–51.
 8. Garcia-Espinosa V , Curcio S, Marotta M, Castro JM, Arana M, Peluso G, Chiesa P, Giachetto 
G, Bia D, Zócalo Y . Changes in central aortic pressure levels, wave components and determi-
nants associated with high peripheral blood pressure states in childhood: analysis of hyperten-
sive phenotype. Pediatr Cardiol. 2016;37:1340–50.
 9. Urbina EM, Khoury PR, McCoy C, Daniels SR, Kimball TR, Dolan LM. Cardiac and vascular 
consequences of pre-hypertension in youth. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2011;13:332–42.
 10. Lurbe E, Torro I, Garcia-Vicent C, Alvarez J, Fernandez-Fornoso JA, Redon J. Blood pres-
sure and obesity exert independent influences on pulse wave velocity in youth. Hypertension. 
2012;60:550–5.
 11. Murgan I, Beyer S, Kotliar KE, Weber L, Bechtold-Dalla Pozza S, Dalla Pozza R, Wegner A, 
Sitnikova D, Stock K, Heemann U, Schmaderer C, Baumann M. Arterial and retinal vascular 
changes in hypertensive and prehypertensive adolescents. Am J Hypertens. 2013;26:400–8.
 12. Lorenzo C, Aung K, Stern M, Haffner S. Pulse pressure, prehypertension, and mortality: the 
San Antonio heart study. Am J Hypertens. 2009;22:1219–26.
 13. Gedikli O, Kiris A, Ozturk S, Baltaci D, Karaman K, Durmus I, Baykan M, Celik S. Effects of 
prehypertension on arterial stiffness and wave reflections. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2010;32:84–9.
 14. Tomiyama H, Matsumoto C, Yamada J, Yoshida M, OdairaM SK, Nagata M, Yamashina 
A.  Predictors ofprogression from prehypertension to hypertension in Japanesemen. Am J 
Hypertens. 2009;22:630–6.
 15. Najjar S, Scuteri A, Shetty V , Wright J, Muller FJ, Spurgeon H, Ferrucci L, Lakatta E. Pulse 
wave velocity is an independent predictor of the longitudinalincrease in systolic blood pressure 
and of incident hypertension inthe Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2008;51:1377–83.
 16. Tomiyama H, Hashimoto H, Matsumoto C, Odaira M, YoshidaM SK, Nagata M, Yamashina 
A, Doba N, Hinohara S. Effects of aging and persistent prehypertension on arterialstiffening. 
Atherosclerosis. 2011;217:130–4.
 17. Celik T, Iyisoy A, Kursaklioglu H, Turhan H, CagdasYuksel U, Kilic S, Kutsi Kabul H, Genc 
C.  Impaired aortic elasticproperties in young patients with prehypertension. Blood Press 
Monit. 2006;11:251–5.
 18. Erdogan D, Caliskan M, Yildrim I, Gullu H, Baycan S, Ciftici O, Yildir A, Mederrisoglu 
H. Effects of normal blood pressure, prehypertension and hypertension on left ventricular dia-
stolic function and aortic elastic properties. Blood Press. 2007;16:114–21.
 19. Jia C, Jiang Y , Yang Z, Sun X, Yu Y , Wang H, Lu Y , Chen A, Wang Z. Ascending aortic elastic-
ity and related risk factors study on prehypertension patients. Am J Hypertens. 2017;30:61–6.
 20. Toikka J, Niemi P, Ahotupa M, Niinikoski H, Rönnemaa T, Viikari J, Hartiala J, Raitakari 
O.  Decreased large artery distensibility in borderline hypertension is related to increased 
in vivo low-density lipoprotein oxidation. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2002;62:301–6.
 21. Pauletto P, Palatini P, Da Ros S, Pagliara V , Santipolo N, Baccillieri S, Casiglia E, Mormino 
P, Pessina AC. Factors underlying the increase in carotid intima-media thickness in borderline 
hypertensives. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1999;19:1231–7.
 22. Day TG, Park M, Kinra S. The association between blood pressure and carotid intima-media 
thickness in children: a systematic review. Cardiol Young. 2017:1–11.
 23. Jourdan C, Wuhl E, Litwin M, Fahr K, Trelewicz J, Jobs K, Schenk JP, Grenda R, Mehls O, 
Tröger J, Schaefer F. Normative values for intima-media thickness and distensibility of large 
arteries in healthy adolescents. J Hypertens. 2005;23:1707–15.
 24. Stabouli S, Kotsis V , Karagianni C, Zakopoulos N, Konstantopoulos A. Blood pressure and 
carotid artery intima-media thickness in children and adolescents: the role of obesity. Hell J 
Cardiol. 2012;53:41–7.
J. Ana et al.547
 25. Manios E, Michas F, Tsivgoulis G, Stamatelopoulos K, Tsagalis G, Koroboki E, Alexaki 
E, Papamichael C, Vemmos K, Zakopoulos N. Impact of prehypertension on carotid artery 
intima-media thickening: actual or masked? Atherosclerosis. 2011;214:215–9.
 26. Alpaydin S, Turan Y , Caliskan M, Caliskan Z, Aksu F, Ozyildirim S, Buyukterzi Z, Kostek O, 
Muderrisoglu H. Morning blood pressure surge is associated with carotid intima-media thick-
ness in prehypertensive patients. Blood Press Monit. 2017;22:131–6.
 27. Hong H, Wang H, Liao H.  Prehypertension is associated with increased carotid athero-
sclerotic plaque in the community population of southern China. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 
2013;13:20–8.
 28. Manios E, Tsivgoulis G, Koroboki E, Stamatelopoulos K, Papamichael C, Toumanidis S, 
Stamboulis E Vemmos K, Zakopoulos N. Impact of prehypertension on common carotid artery 
intima-media thickness and left ventricular mass. Stroke. 2009;40:1515–8.
 29. Psaty BM, Arnold AM, Olson J, Saad MF, Shea S, Post W, Burke GL. Association between 
levels of blood pressure and measures of subclinical disease multi-ethnic study of atheroscle-
rosis. Am J Hypertens. 2006;19:1110–7.
 30. Karasek D, Vaaverkova H, Halenka M, Jackuliakova D, Frysak Z, Orsag J, Novotny 
D.  Prehypertension in dyslipidemic individuals; relationship to metabolic parameters and 
intima-media thickness. Biomed Pap Med Fac Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub. 2013;157:41–9.
 31. Femia R, Kozakova M, Nannipieri M, Gonzales-Villalpando C, Stern MP, Haffner SM, 
Ferrannini E. Carotid intima-media thickness in confirmed prehypertensive subjects predictors 
and progression. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007;27:2244–9.
 32. Liew G, Wang JJ, Mitchell P, Wong TY . Retinal vascular imaging: a new tool in microvascular 
disease research. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2008;1:156–61.
 33. Wong TY , Liew G, Tapp RJ, Schmidt MI, Wang JJ, Mitchell P, Klein R, Klein BE, Zimmet 
P, Shaw J. Relation between fasting glucose and retinopathy for diagnosis of diabetes: three 
population-based crosssectional studies. Lancet. 2008;371:736–43.
 34. Wong TY , Klein R, Sharrett AR, Duncan BB, Couper DJ, Klein BEK, Hubbard LD, Nieto 
FJ. For the atherosclerosis risk in communities study. Retinal arteriolar diameter and risk for 
hypertension. Ann Intern Med. 2004;140:248–55.
 35. Cuspidi C, Negri F, Giudici V , Sala C. Retinal changes and cardiac remodelling in systemic 
hypertension. Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis. 2009;3:205–14.
 36. Liew G, Sharrett AR, Wang JJ, Klein R, Klein BE, Mitchell P, Wong TY . Relative importance 
of systemic determinants of retinal arteriolar and venular caliber: the atherosclerosis risk in 
communities study. Arch Ophthalmol. 2008;126:1404–10.
 37. Wong TY , Islam FM, Klein R, Klein BE, Cotch MF, Castro C, et al. Retinal vascular cali-
ber, cardiovascular risk factors, and inflammation: the multiethnic study of atherosclerosis 
(MESA). Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006;47:2341–50.
 38. De Jong FJ, Ikram MK, Witteman JC, Hofman A, de Jong PT, Breteler MM. Retinal vessel 
diameters and the role of inflammation in cerebrovascular disease. Ann Neurol. 2007;61:491–5.
 39. Sabanayagam C, Shankar A, Koh D, Chia KS, Saw SM, Lim SC, et al. Retinal microvascular 
caliber and chronic kidney disease in an Asian population. Am J Epidemiol. 2009;169:625–32.
 40. Wang JJ, Mitchell P, Leung H, Rochtchina E, Wong TY , Klein R. Hypertensive retinal ves-
sel wall signs in a general older population: the Blue Mountains eye study. Hypertension. 
2003;42:534–41.
 41. Wong TY , Klein R, Klein BEK, Tielsch J, Hubbard LD, Nieto FJ.  Retinal microvascular 
abnormalities, and their relation to hypertension, cardiovascular diseases and mortality. Surv 
Ophthalmol. 2001;46:59–80.
 42. Grassi G, Buzzi S, Dell Oro R, Mineo C, Dimitriadis K, Seravalle G, Lonati L, Cuspidi 
C. Structural alterations of the retinal microcirculation in the “prehypertensive” high-normal 
blood pressure state. Curr Pharm Des. 2013;19:2375–81.
 43. Klein R, Sharrett AR, Klein BEK, Chambless L, Cooper S, Hubbard LD, Evans G. Are retinal 
arteriolar abnormalities related to atherosclerosis? The atherosclerosis risk in communities 
study. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000;20:1644–50.
 44. Sharrett AR, Hubbard LD, Cooper LS, Sorlie PD, Brothers RJ, Nieto FJ, Pinsky JL, Klein 
R. Retinal arteriolar diameters and elevated blood pressure: the atherosclerosis risk in com-
munities study. Am J Epidemiol. 1999;150:263–70.34 Early Cardiovascular Dysfunction in Prehypertension548
 45. Mitchell P, Cheung N, de Haseth K, Taylor B, Rochtchina E, Islam FM, Wang JJ, Saw 
SM, Wong TY .  Blood pressure and retinal arteriolar narrowing in children. Hypertension. 
2007;49:1156–62.
 46. Klein R, Klein BEK, Moss SE. The relation of systemic hypertension to changes in the retinal 
vasculature. The beaver dam eye study. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 1997;95:329–50.
 47. Dinga J, Wai KL, McGeechand K, Lkrama MK, Kawasaki R, Xie J, Klein R, Klein B BK, 
Frances Cotch M, Wang JJ, Mitchell P, Shaw JE, Takamasa K, Richey Sharrett A, Wonga TY , 
for the Meta-Eye Study Group. Retinal vascular caliber and the development of hypertension: 
a meta-analysis of individual participant data. J Hypertens. 2014;32:207–15.
 48. Xia F, Liu G, Shi Y , Zhang Y . Impact of microalbuminuria on incident coronary heart disease, 
cardiovascular and all-cause mortality: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. Int J Clin Exp 
Med. 2015;8:1–9.
 49. Weil BR, Stauffer BL, Greiner JJ, DeSouza CA. Prehypertension is associated with impaired 
nitric oxide-mediated endothelium-dependent vasodilation in sedentary adults. Am J 
Hypertens. 2011;24:976–81.
 50. Wang G, Wang A, Tong W, Liu Y , Zhang Y .  Association of elevated inflammatory and 
endothelial biomarkers with prehypertension among Mongolians in China. Hypertens Res. 
2011;34:516–20.
 51. Nikolov P, Nikolov J, Prbecova M, Deneva T, Vladimirova L, Atanasova P, Hrischev P, 
Gerogieva E, Nikolov F.  Flow mediated vasodilatation and some biomarkers of endothe-
lial activation in pre-hypertensive objects. 2015 Nov 24. pii: wimj.2015.033. https://doi.
org/10.7727/wimj.2015.033.
 52. Vrdoljak A, Ivković V , Karanović S, Dika Ž, Vuković I, Kos J, Laganović M, Željković Vrkić 
T, FištrekPrlić M, Pećin I, Jelaković B. Markers of early renal impairment in prehypertension. 
J Hypertension. 2016;34(Suppl 1. - ISH 2016 Abstract Book):e47.
 53. Knight E, Kramer H, Curhan G. High normal blood pressure and microalbuminuria. Am J Kid 
Dis. 2003;41:588–95.
 54. Ogunniyi MO, Croft JB, Greenlund KJ, Giles WH, Mensah GA. Racial/ethnic differences in 
microalbuminuria among adults with prehypertension and hypertension: National Health and 
nutrition examination survey (NHANES), 1999–2006. Am J Hypertens. 2010;23:859–64.
 55. Tenekecioglu E, Yilmaz M, Yontar O, Karaagac K, Agca F, Tutuncu A, Kuzeytemiz M, Bekler 
A, Senturk M, Aydin U, Demir Ş. Microalbuminuria in untreated prehypertension and hyper -
tension without diabetes. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014;7:3420–9.
 56. Kim B, Lee H, Sung K, Kim B, Kang J, Lee M, Park J. Comparison of microalbuminuria in 2 
blood pressure categories of Prehypertensive subjects. Circ J. 2007;71:1283–128.
 57. Lee J, Kim Y , Choi Y , Huh W, Kim D, Young H. Serum uric acid is associated with microalbu-
minuria in prehypertension. Hypertension. 2006;47:962–7.
 58. Okada R, Yasuda Y , Tsushita K, Wakai K, Hamajima N, Matsuo S. Glomerular hyperfiltration 
in prediabetes and prehypertension. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012;27(5):1821.
 59. Yi H, Zhang WZ, Zhang H, Chen YH, Zhou MC. Subclinical target organ damage in normo-
tensive and prehypertensive patients. Minerva Cardioangiol. 2017;65:16–23.
 60. Peng H, Ding J, Peng Y , Zhang Q, Xu Y , Chao X, Tian H, Zhang Y . Hyperuricemia and micro-
albuminuria are separately and independently associated with prehypertension among Chinese 
Han women. Metab Syndr Relat Disord. 2012;10:202–8.
 61. Zhang Q, Peng H, Ding JS, Xu YY , Chao XQ, Tian HG, Zhang YH. Association between 
urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio and prehypertension. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing XueZaZhi. 
2012;33:32–6.
 62. Ding J, Peng H, Peng Y , Zhang Q, Xu Y , Chao X, Tian H, Zhang Y .  Urinary albumin-to- 
creatinine ratio in a first-morning void urine and prehypertension among Chinese Han women. 
Blood Press. 2012;21:128–33.
 63. Wang Q, Huang J, Sun Y , Zhang W, Gao Y , Yao W, Bian B, Li Y , Wu X, Niu K. Association of 
microalbuminuria with diabetes is stronger in people with prehypertension compared to those 
with ideal blood pressure. Nephrology (Carlton). 2017. https://doi.org/10.1111/nep.13082. 
[Epub ahead of print].
J. Ana et al.549
 64. Wang T, Evans J, Meigs J, Rifai N, Fox C, D’Agostino R, Levy D, Vasan R.  Low-grade 
albuminuria and the risks of hypertension and blood pressure progression. Circulation. 
2005;111:1370–6.
 65. Norton G, Maseko M, Libhaber E, Libhaber C, Majane O, Dessein P, Sareli P, Woodiwiss A. Is 
prehypertension an independent predictor of target organ changes in young-to-middle-aged 
persons of African descent? J Hypertens. 2008;26:2279–87.
 66. Sehestedta T, Jeppesena J, Hansenb T, Rasmussene S, Wachtellf K, Ibseng H, Torp-Pedersenc 
C, Olsen M. Which markers of subclinical organ damage to measure in individuals with high 
normal blood pressure? J Hypertens. 2009;27:1165–71.
 67. Ivkovic V , Parini A, Vrdoljak A, Karanovic S, Baric M, Abramovic M, Bachelli S, Cagnati M, 
Cicero A, D’Addato S, Esposti D, Fucek M, Grandi E, Kos J, Laganovic M, Rogic D, Rosticci 
M, Vukovic I, Borghi C, Jelakovic B. Predictors of incident hypertension in prehypertensives. 
J Hypertens. 2016;34:e127–8.
 68. Bajpai J, Agarwal S, Garg B, Goel A. Impact of prehypertension on left ventricular structure, 
function and geometry. J Clin Diagn Res. 2014;8:BC07–10.
 69. Di Bello V , Talini E, Gianno C, Dele Donne MG, Canale ML, Nardi C, Palagi C, Dini FL, 
Penno G, DelPrao S, Marzilli M, Pedrinelli R.  Early left ventricular mechincs abnormali-
ties in prehypertension: a two-dimensional strain echocardiography study. Am J Hypertens. 
2010;23:405–12.
 70. Ahn H-S, Kim S-J, Kim M-K, Choue C-W, Kim K-S, Song J-S, Bae J-H. The difference of 
left ventricular hypertrophy and the diastolic function between prehypertensives and normo-
tensives. Korean Circulation J. 2006;36:437–42.
 71. Kim S, Cho G-Y , Baik I, Lim S, Choi C, Lim H, Kim E, Park C, Kim J, Shin C. Early abnor -
malities of cardiovascular structure and function in middle-aged Korean adults with prehyper -
tension; The Korean Genome Epidemiology Study. Am J Hypertens. 2011;24:218–24.
 72. Jung J, Park S, Oh C-O, Kang J, Choi J-M, Ryoo J-H, Lee J-H. The influence of prehyperten-
sion, controlled and uncontrolled hypertension on left ventricular diastolic function and struc-
ture in the general Korean population. Hypertens Res. 2017;40:606–12.
 73. Litwin M, Niemirska A, Sladowska J, Antoniewicz J, Daszkowska J, Wierzbicka A, Wawer Z, 
Grenda R. Left ventricular hypertrophy and arterial wall thickening in children with essential 
hypertension. Pediatr Nephrol. 2006;21:811–9.
 74. Sorof JM, Turner J, Martin DS, Garcia K, Garami Z, Alexandrov A V , Wan F, Portman 
RJ.  Cardiovascular risk factors and sequelae in hypertensive children identified by referral 
versus school-based screening. Hypertension. 2004;43:214–8.
 75. McNiece KL, Gupta-Malhotra M, Samuels J, Bell C, Garcia K, Poffenbarger T, Sorof JM, 
Portman RJ, National High Blood Pressure Education Program Working Group. Left ventricu-
lar hypertrophy in hypertensive adolescents: analysis of risk by 2004 National High Blood 
Pressure Education Program Working Group staging criteria. Hypertension. 2007;50:392–5.
 76. Falkner B, DeLoach S, Keith SW, Gidding SS.  High risk blood pressure and obesity 
increase the risk for left ventricular hypertrophy in African-American adolescents. J Pediatr. 
2013;162:94–100.
 77. Markus M, Stritzke J, Lieb W, Mayer B, Luchner A, Doring A, Keil U, Hense H-W, Schunkert 
H.  Implications of persistent prehypertension for ageing-related changes in left ventricular 
geometry and function: The MONICA/KORA Augsburg study. J Hypertens. 2008;26:2040–9.
 78. Jang S, Kim S, Lee C, Cho E, Cho S, Lee S-C. Prehypertension and left ventricular dysfunc-
tion in middle-aged Koreans. Korean Circ J. 2016;46:536–41.
 79. Santos A, Gupta D, Bello N, Gori M, Claggett B, Fuchs F, Shah A, Coresh J, Sharrett A, Cheng 
S, Solomon S. Prehypertension is associated with abnormalities of cardiac structure and func-
tion in the atherosclerosis risk in communities study. Am J Hypertens. 2016;29:568–74.
 80. Sironi AM, Pingitore A, Ghione S, De Marchi D, Scattini B, Positano V , Muscelli E, Ciociaro 
D, Lombardi M, Ferrannini E, Gastaldelli A. Early hypertension is associated with reduced 
regional cardiac function, insulin resistance, epicardial, and visceral fat. Hypertension. 
2008;51:282–8.34 Early Cardiovascular Dysfunction in PrehypertensionPart VI
Clinical Studies in Prehypertension553 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_35
B. M. Egan  
Department of Medicine, University of South Carolina School of Medicine,  
Greenville, SC, USA 
Care Coordination Institute, Greenville, SC, USA
e-mail: began@ccihealth.org35Neurogenic Mechanisms 
in Prehypertension and Pharmacologic 
Approaches to the Prevention 
and Treatment of Hypertension: 
Highlights of Professor Stevo Julius’ 
Scientific Contributions
Brent M. Egan
Stevo Julius, MD, ScD, has served as Professor of Medicine at the University of 
Michigan Medical Center for more than 50 years where he continues as Professor 
Emeritus. During that time, he has made numerous original and important scientific 
contributions. His initial research centered on defining personality characteristics 
and autonomic mechanisms in the hemodynamic profile of individuals with border -
line hypertension or prehypertension [1, 2]. Dr. Julius’ early work was instrumental 
in defining a key primary role for the sympathetic nervous system in borderline and 
established hypertension [3–5].
In the middle phase of his scientific career, Dr. Julius and colleagues documented 
a key primary role for the sympathetic nervous system in the pathogenesis of hyper -
insulinemia, insulin resistance, and the cardiometabolic syndrome [6–9]. All of the 
cardiometabolic phenomena were associated with increased heart rate, a marker of 
neurogenic activation. While an extensive body of research documents that excess 
caloric intake and obesity can drive the cardiometabolic syndrome [10], Dr. Julius 
demonstrated that elevated blood pressure was already present in young, normal 
weight children of hypertensive parents [8]. Excess weight gain and further eleva-
tion of blood pressure as well as multiple features of the cardiometabolic syndrome 
followed this early “prehypertensive” phase. Collectively, these data suggest that 
sympathetic activation with elevated blood pressure can precede the cardiometa-
bolic syndrome.554
During the latter part of his still active career, Professor Julius has worked with 
longtime colleagues on pharmacological interventions for the prevention and treat-
ment of hypertension [11–14]. The rational and provocative interpretation of the 
data from these trials has often challenged existing paradigms and stimulated criti-
cal thinking to enhance our understanding of hypertension-related risk and its miti-
gation. This review highlights several of Dr. Julius’ original scientific contributions 
and the many clinically insightful and relevant applications of that work.
35.1  Borderline Hypertension—The Early Y ears
Personality characteristics associated with prehypertension and hypertension. In 
1964, Harburg and Julius obtained blood pressures on 800 male undergraduate stu-
dents at the University of Michigan who were waiting in line to register for classes. 
From this group, 74 white men were selected for having systolic blood pressure (BP, 
mmHg) values either in the upper or lower end of the distribution [1]. Students were 
classified as having high or low systolic BP according to their paired casual (screen-
ing and first follow-up visit), usual (self-measured home BP). Of 21 persons with a 
high paired casual SBP >140, 16 also had repeated home SBP readings >131. 
Among this group, 11 had high home BP readings, defined as sustained hyperten-
sion. The BP patterns of these young men were then related with self-ratings on the 
Cattell 16 Personality Factor Questionnaire.
Sustained elevation of systolic BP in male college students was associated with 
“submissiveness” and “sensitivity” as defined by Cattell’s Questionnaire. Subjects 
with “high paired casual” systolic BP values described themselves as motivated to 
obtain social contacts, but in a “sensitive” and “anxious” manner. Subjects who 
were later selected for having a single high systolic BP on first entering the physi-
cian’s office (second casual reading) tended more frequently to yield in an argument 
and then afterwards to change their private opinions toward agreement with partners 
who had an initially low systolic BP [1].
A subsequent study in 1986 by Professor Julius and coworkers utilized advances in 
questionnaire methodology to more thoroughly dissect personality characteristics of 
young college males with elevated BP in the screening, clinic and home environments 
[2]. The questionnaires included Spielberger’s State-Trait Personality Inventory, the 
Anger Expression Scale, and the State Anger Reaction Scale [15]. As with the previ-
ous study [1 ], BP measurements were obtained on students waiting to register for their 
next semester classes. Undergraduate men in the upper end of the BP distribution 
were recalled to complete the questionnaires and to undergo self-measured home BP 
measurements. Two groups were identified. One group maintained high BP at home, 
and the second group had normal BP at home. Of interest, the group that maintained 
high BP at home reported greater intensity of anger and suppressed their anger to a 
greater extent than the group whose BP was normal at home.
The findings in this 1986 report were consistent with Alexander’s original work 
and hypothesis [16] that inhibition of angry or hostile impulses can increase systemic 
BP.  Moreover, the hypertensive personality has a long-term conflict between the 
B. M. Egan555
need for passive dependence and the need for expressing hostile impulses. According 
to Alexander, it is this long-term conflict which can lead to sustained elevation of 
arterial BP or hypertension, evident among young men in the 1986 report [2 ].
Linkage of anger to sympathetic activation and parasympathetic withdrawal. 
Marci et al. studied autonomic and prefrontal cortex responses to autobiographical 
recall of emotions [17]. Of emotions studied, anger was the only one to show a sig-
nificant increase in sympathetic activity, accompanied by a significant decrease in 
cardiac parasympathetic or vagal tone as measured by the high frequency compo-
nent of heart rate variability. While the study by Marci and colleagues is not the first 
to show that anger induces sympathetic activation, it is among the clearest to show 
a reciprocal and concomitant reduction of cardiac vagal tone.
The role of sympathetic activation and parasympathetic inhibition in the hyper -
kinetic hemodynamic profile of borderline hypertension. Dr. Julius and colleagues 
published a series of papers on the hemodynamics of borderline hypertension in the 
prestigious American Heart Association Journal, Circulation in 1971. One report 
captured their work on sequential autonomic blockade of β-adrenoceptors with the 
nonselective blocker propranolol followed by parasympathetic inhibition using 
atropine [3]. Both autonomic blocking agents were administered intravenously at 
doses known to fully block the respective systems.
At baseline, individuals with hyperkinetic borderline hypertension had higher 
values than normotensive controls for cardiac output and heart rate (Fig.  35.1). 
β-Adrenoceptor blockade led to a larger fall of cardiac output and heart rate among 
Rest Propranolol AtropineR est
Adapted from Ju lius S,  et al: Circulation 1971320Bord erline Hyper tension
Contr ol Subjects253035404550
6070Hear t Rate (bpm)
Cardiac Inde x (I/min/m2)
8090100110120
Propranolol Atropine
Fig. 35.1 At baseline, heart rate and cardiac index are higher in hyperkinetic borderline hyperten-
sives than age- and sex-matched normal controls. After propranolol, heart rate and cardiac index 
decline more in the hyperkinetic than normal group, yet values remain higher in the former. With 
addition of atropine, heart rate and cardiac index increase less in the hyperkinetic than in the con-
trol group and significant between group differences were abolished35 Neurogenic Mechanisms in Prehypertension and Pharmacologic Approaches556
individuals with hyperkinetic borderline hypertension. These data were consistent 
with increased cardiac beta-adrenergic tone in the hyperkinetic group. Yet, cardiac 
output and heart rate remained significantly higher in the hyperkinetic borderline 
hypertensive group than in the normal controls. When atropine was administered 
while continuing beta-adrenergic blockade with propranolol, cardiac output and 
heart rate increased less in subjects with hyperkinetic borderline hypertension than 
in normal controls. The responses to atropine indicate that cardiac parasympathetic 
tone is lower in hyperkinetic borderline hypertension than in normal controls.
Only after total cardiac autonomic blockade with both propranolol and atropine 
were the differences in cardiac output and heart rate no longer significantly different 
between the group with hyperkinetic borderline hypertension and healthy controls. 
These data indicate that the hyperkinetic state of borderline hypertension reflects a 
reciprocal autonomic abnormality characterized both by increased sympathetic and 
reduced parasympathetic tone.
Transition from hyperkinetic borderline hypertension to normokinetic borderline 
and established essential hypertension. Research on borderline or prehypertension 
consistently identifies a hyperkinetic subset of young individuals with elevated car -
diac output and a fast heart rate. Faster heart rates, even within the range of 
60–100 beats/min, which are considered normal, are a strong predictor of future 
essential hypertension [18], and many hyperkinetic subjects appear to develop clas-
sical established hypertension [19]. However, the hyperkinetic state is much less 
common in adults with hypertension. Thus, transition from the hyperkinetic border -
line hypertension to normokinetic, high-resistance hypertension almost certainly 
occurs and is supported by data from sequential hemodynamic studies [19].
In fact, Julius and colleagues provided further evidence that individuals with bor -
derline hypertension and normal cardiac output may represent a later phase of the 
prior hyperkinetic state. More specifically, baseline heart rate was elevated less 
among individuals with borderline hypertension and normal cardiac output than in 
prior studies of the hyperkinetic subset with borderline hypertension. Following car -
diac autonomic blockade with intravenous propranolol and atropine, their cardiac 
output was lower than normal controls [20]. Heart rate responses to the β-agonist 
isoproterenol were less in borderline hypertensives with normal cardiac output than 
in demographically matched normotensive controls. The borderline blood pressure 
elevation in subjects with normokinetic borderline hypertensive was maintained by 
an elevated vascular resistance. Compared to normokinetic group with borderline 
hypertension, the higher blood pressure in established hypertension reflects a further 
increase of vascular resistance as a normal cardiac out is maintained.
Of note, while hypertension in obesity was identified as a state of high cardiac 
output and normal vascular resistance, vascular resistance is elevated when com-
pared to obese, demographically matched normal controls [21, 22]. The Ann Arbor 
group documented that forearm vasodilator responses to regional infusion of phen-
tolamine were greater in overweight and obese than in leaner subjects, despite 
higher baseline flows with normal resistance in the obese group [23]. The inappro-
priately normal vascular resistance in obese subjects with elevated blood pressure is 
maintained by enhanced vascular alpha-adrenergic tone similar to the increased 
B. M. Egan557
vascular α-adrenergic tone similar to that observed in neurogenic, high-renin hyper -
tension [4, 5].
Mechanisms underlying the hemodynamic transition from hyperkinetic border -
line hypertension to normokinetic hypertension. A utoregulation . Dr. Arthur 
Guyton and colleagues demonstrated that volume expansion leads to increased car -
diac output and tissue perfusion in excess of metabolic demands [24]. When this 
occurs, most organ systems increase vascular resistance to reestablish the balance 
between metabolic demands and supply, which raises arterial blood pressure. The 
phenomenon of matching blood flow to metabolic demands by varying vascular 
resistance is termed “autoregulation” [25].
Basis for an alternative explanation to autoregulation for the hemodynamic tran-
sition from hyperkinetic borderline to established hypertension with normal cardiac 
output. Studies in borderline hypertension provided two important pieces of evi-
dence contrary to autoregulation as the mechanism for the hemodynamic transition. 
First, plasma volume was lower and not higher among borderline hypertensives 
than normal controls, when adjusted for body weight or when compared in weight-
matched individuals with borderline hypertensive to healthy controls [26]. Second, 
in subjects with hyperkinetic borderline hypertension, higher cardiac output 
occurred together with greater total body oxygen consumption [27]. In fact, the 
regression line for cardiac output versus total body oxygen consumption was the 
same in subjects with borderline hypertension and demographically matched nor -
mal controls. The stimulus for autoregulation, based on whole body studies, was not 
apparent in hyperkinetic borderline hypertensives.
Neurogenic and vascular transformation. An alternative explanation for the 
hemodynamic transition from hyperkinetic borderline to normokinetic borderline 
and essential hypertension: Focus on decreased β-adrenergic sensitivity, cardiovas-
cular remodeling and increased vascular α-adrenergic tone.
Cardiac changes. Sustained increases in cardiac sympathetic drive lead to 
decreased chronotropic and inotropic responses to β 1-adrenoceptor activation [20, 
28, 29]. Furthermore, a decline in left ventricular compliance may contribute to 
lower stroke volume in patients with normokinetic mild hypertension [20, 30]. 
More specifically, Julius and colleagues documented that stroke volume in patients 
with mild hypertension was lower than in normotensive controls following cardiac 
autonomic blockade with propranolol and atropine. Stroke volume following car -
diac autonomic blockade becomes largely dependent on end-diastolic volume. In 
these studies, cardiopulmonary blood volume was similar in hypertensive adults 
and normotensive controls, which suggests similar levels of preload [20, 30].
A stiffer, less compliant left ventricular in hypertensives could lead to lower 
ventricular volume end-diastole and a reduced stroke volume [28]. Decreased car -
diac compliance, in turn, most likely reflects early cardiac restructuring in response 
to long-standing mild blood pressure elevation. Julius and coworker proposed that 
the combination of downregulation of cardiac β 1-adrenergic receptors with decreased 
chronotropic and inotropic responses to sympathetic drive together with decreased 
cardiac compliance and stroke volume contribute to the normalization of cardiac 
output in established hypertension [31].35 Neurogenic Mechanisms in Prehypertension and Pharmacologic Approaches558
Vascular changes. Concurrent structural vascular remodeling supports the pro-
gressive rise in vascular resistance. Sustained blood pressure elevation leads to 
remodeling of the arterial wall. Increased sympathetic stimulation is also well-doc-
umented vascular trophic factor [32, 33]. Thus, individuals with neurogenic border -
line and established hypertension appear especially prone to cardiac and vascular 
remodeling. While medial smooth muscle hypertrophy with an increase in muscle 
wall mass can occur, the predominant change may reflect remodeling of the wall 
mass around a small vascular lumen based on anatomical studies in Denmark and 
physiologic studies in Ann Arbor [34, 35]. With either true hypertrophy with an 
increased vascular wall mass or remodeling of the vascular media with a normal 
wall mass surrounding a small lumen, the vascular wall:lumen ratio increases. In 
this setting, minimum vascular resistance is higher and vasoconstrictor responses 
are nonspecifically amplified. Folkow and colleagues were the pioneers in showing 
how an increased wall:lumen ratio contributes to hypertension by nonspecifically 
augmenting vascular resistance responses to vasoactive stimuli [36].
Subsequent studies by Dr. Julius and colleagues in relatively young subjects with 
Stage 1 hypertension compared to demographically and weight-matched normoten-
sive controls were consistent with vascular remodeling as a nonspecific amplifier of 
arterial resistance in response to different vasoconstrictors (Fig.  35.2) [37]. Folkow’s 
criteria for vascular remodeling as an amplifier of resistance responses were met in 
the Stage 1 hypertensive compared to matched controls including: (1) minimum 
forearm vascular resistance, an index of vascular remodeling, (2) vascular sensitiv-
ity to both vasoconstrictors, as estimated by the concentration required to induce 
30% of the maximal vasoconstrictor response, was similar, (3) forearm vasocon-
strictor responses to both norepinephrine and angiotensin were characterized by a 
0255075100125150
Base 0.00125 0.02 0.16 0.005 0.08 0.24Stage 1 Hyper tension
Adapted from Egan B,  et al: J Clin In vest. 1987 37Matched ControlsSimilar dose-response cur ves
were obtained with angiotensinForearm vascular resistance responses (y-axis) to
regional NE (µg/100 mL f orear m vo lume/min) (x-axis)
Fig. 35.2 Baseline forearm vascular resistance was slightly higher in Stage 1 hypertensives than 
matched normal controls. Note forearm resistance responses between the two groups diverge pro-
gressively with increasing doses of regional norepinephrine. Maximum forearm responses were 
also greater in hypertensives than in matched normotensive controls
B. M. Egan559
steeper slope, and (4) greater maximum resistance responses. (5) forearm vascular 
responses to both vasoconstrictors were ‘non-specifically’ enhanced and also 
directly related to the minimum vascular resistance, a measure of vascular remodel-
ing. Moreover, the vasodilator response to phentolamine was significantly greater in 
subjects with Stage 1 hypertension than in controls indicating greater vascular 
alpha-tone. The latter finding coincides with earlier studies by Drs. Esler, Julius and 
colleagues described next.
Neurogenic borderline and established essential hypertension. The investigative 
team then documented that adding systemic α-adrenergic blockade with phentol-
amine to cardiac autonomic blockade with propranolol and atropine normalized 
arterial blood pressure in approximately one-third of subjects with borderline 
hypertension (Fig. 35.3) [4, 5].
These subjects were characterized by high-renin values, which likely reflected 
increased sympathetic drive to β 1-receptors on the juxtaglomerular cells, which 
stimulate renin secretion. The fact that acute and total autonomic blockade normal-
ized blood pressure by reducing vascular resistance suggested to the authors that 
angiotensin probably did not play a critical role in the elevated blood pressure of 
borderline hypertensive subjects with high plasma renin values.
The investigators subsequently extended their observations on high-renin and 
neurogenic hypertension to adults with established essential hypertension [5]. 
Subsequent studies using more contemporary methodologies including muscle 
sympathetic nerve activity and norepinephrine turnover documented sympathetic 
overactivity is present in a substantial proportion of adults with essential hyperten-
sion including those who are obese [38, 39].
Normal & Low R enin
High R enin
Healthy Contro lsNS
NSNS
MBP mmHg
Total Autonomic Bloc kade Rest708090100
Adapted from Esler M, et al.  Am J Cardiol. 1975 4
Fig. 35.3 Three groups of subjects with borderline hypertension were studied. The three groups 
included subjects with low renin (closed triangles), normal renin (open triangles), and high renin 
(open circles) borderline hypertension. All three groups with borderline hypertension had higher 
mean blood pressure (MBP, mmHg) at rest than healthy controls. Following total autonomic block-
ade with propranolol, atropine, and phentolamine, MBP fell only in the high renin group and was 
no longer significantly greater than MBP in normal controls (closed circles)35 Neurogenic Mechanisms in Prehypertension and Pharmacologic Approaches560
Renal norepinephrine spillover is increased in both obese hypertensives and nor -
motensives, whereas cardiac norepinephrine spillover is higher only in obese hyper -
tensives. The increased renal sympathetic activity likely supports the volume 
expansion with obesity and in obesity hypertension, while increased sympathetic 
drive to other organs including the heart appears to contribute to the elevated blood 
pressure. One might postulate that the increased systemic blood pressure should 
suppress renal and cardiac sympathetic activity in the hypertensive obese subset. 
The fact that renal sympathetic activity is increased and not suppressed in obese 
hypertensive adults indirectly supports the premise by Guyton and colleagues that 
factors intrinsic or extrinsic to the kidney that increase sodium-volume retention are 
required to sustain hypertension [24, 25].
Sympathetic activation and the cardiometabolic syndrome. In a population-based 
community sample in Tecumseh, Michigan, Dr. Julius and colleagues demonstrated 
that heart rate, a marker of sympathetic activation, correlated with several metabolic 
features of the cardiometabolic syndrome among young adults in the early phase of 
hypertension (Fig. 35.4) [40].
The relationship between heart rate and hyperinsulinemia was especially strong. 
The hyperinsulinemia most likely represents a compensatory response to insulin 
resistance as identified by the inverse relationship with HDL cholesterol and direct 
link with hypertriglyceridemia.
Skeletal muscle is a key target organ for insulin action [41]. Resistance to insu-
lin-mediated glucose disposal, a dominant feature of the cardiometabolic syndrome, 
is exacerbated by increased vascular alpha-adrenergic tone [9, 42–44], a key feature 
High
sympa thetic 
tone
(elevated heart rate) Glc: g lucose
Chol: c holester ol
BP: b lood pr essur e
BMI: body mass inde x
Hem: hema tocrit
Trig: trig lyceride
: P < 0.05
: P < 0.01
: P < 0.0001Glc
Insulin
TrigHDLChol
Adapted from Julius S, et al: JAMA  19906
Fig. 35.4 Among young adults in Tecumseh, Michigan, Dr. Julius and colleagues documented 
that resting heart rate was highly correlated with plasma insulin, strongly correlated with fasting 
glucose (Glc) and total cholesterol (Chol), and modestly yet significantly with high-density lipo-
protein cholesterol (HDL) and trigyclerides (Trig). Three arrows denotes significance at p < 0.001, 
two arrows p < 0.01, and a single arrow p < 0.05. Arrows pointing up and to the right indicate a 
positive association between heart rate and metabolic variables, whereas the arrow pointing down 
and to the left indicates a negative association
B. M. Egan561
of neurogenic hypertension [4, 5]. Drs. Jamerson and Julius demonstrated that insu-
lin-mediated glucose disposal in the human forearm was acutely reduced in response 
to thigh-cuff inflation. Thigh-cuff inflation pools blood in the lower extremities, 
thereby unloading cardiopulmonary mechanoreceptors and inducing reflex forearm 
vasoconstriction [9]. In fact, reflex neurogenic vasoconstriction induced a greater 
degree of forearm insulin resistance than an intra-arterial norepinephrine infusion, 
which reduced forearm blood flow to the same extent as thigh cuff inflation [44]. 
Thus, reflex neurogenic vasoconstriction reduced glucose utilization by mecha-
nisms in addition to reduced blood flow (Fig. 35.5) [44].
The authors cited studies indicating that reflex neurogenic vasoconstriction reduces 
the number of open capillaries in skeletal muscle. Moreover, capillary density in skel-
etal muscle is a major determinant of insulin-mediated glucose disposal in this tissue 
[45]. Their experimental data suggested that neurogenically mediated vasoconstric-
tion [9 , 44], observed in high-renin patients with borderline and established essential 
hypertension [4 , 5], significantly diminishes insulin-mediated glucose disposal in 
skeletal muscle. This notion is consistent with studies showing that selective α 1-
adrenoceptor antagonists improve insulin-mediate glucose disposal in hypertensive 
patients to a greater extent than renin-angiotensin system blockers [42, 43].
40
80
60
100
120
140
Adapt ed from K Ja merson, et al: Hype rtension 1 993 9 
O
2
 and glucos
 e
utilization 
(
mg/dL/m
i
n)
Baseline Insulin Infusion Insulin Infusion
I+ acute vasoconstriction
Insulin Oxygen extraction P <0.05* P <0.02
∗
∗
10
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
0
20
T
ime 
(
min)
Fig. 35.5 After a 30-min baseline period, insulin was infused regionally to raise forearm insulin 
~100 uU/mL for 90 min. Glucose utilization after 40–60 min of regional insulin rose 4–5-fold from 
baseline values. Thigh cuff inflation (beginning 60  min after the regional insulin infusion and 
continuing during thigh cuff inflation) minutes reduced forearm blood flow 19% and glucose utili-
zation fell 23%, p < 0.02 [9]35 Neurogenic Mechanisms in Prehypertension and Pharmacologic Approaches562
Clinical importance of neurogenic effects on cardiometabolic variables. Effective 
antihypertensive therapy reduces stroke more than myocardial infarction [46, 47]. 
One potential explanation for the differential benefit of antihypertensive therapy is 
that hypertension is frequently associated with multiple other cardiovascular risk 
factors that raise the risk for myocardial infarction more than the risk for stroke. In 
fact, increased sympathetic tone may be involved in the genesis of multiple, pres-
sure-independent coronary risk factors in hypertension [31].
Hypertension is frequently associated with hyperinsulinemia and insulin resis-
tance [48]. Insulin resistance is frequently accompanied by a complex atherogenic 
dyslipidemia characterized by increased triglycerides, reduced HDL cholesterol, 
and an increased number of dense LDL cholesterol particles [49]. Julius and col-
leagues provided evidence that these cardiometabolic risk factors are related to 
increased sympathetic drive [9, 40]. They previously reported that increased sympa-
thetic drive is associated with a relative resting tachycardia and elevated hematocrit 
[3, 26]. All of these factors (overweight/obesity, hyperinsulinemia, insulin resis-
tance, dyslipidemia, tachycardia, higher hematocrit) are established risk factors for 
coronary heart disease and sudden death [31, 49–52].
Increased sympathetic drive and obesity: β-adrenoceptor downregulation and 
thermogenesis. Julius and colleagues documented that hyperkinetic borderline 
hypertension was characterized by increased cardiac output, which was matched to 
heightened oxygen consumptions [3, 27]. However, as noted previously, persistent 
excess sympathetic drive leads to desensitization or downregulation of 
β-adrenoceptors. The Ann Arbor group in collaboration with Italian colleagues 
explored the connection between downregulation of cardiac and thermogenic 
responses to the β-adrenoceptor agonist isoproterenol [53]. Subjects for this study 
included hypertensive adults and normal controls of comparable age but with lower 
body mass indices. The investigators documented that baseline heart rate was higher 
in the hypertensive group but that the responses of heart rate and oxygen consump-
tion to isoproterenol were blunted in the hypertensive group. In fact, the chrono-
tropic and thermogenic responses to isoproterenol were inversely related to urinary 
norepinephrine, an index of sympathetic drive.
Repeated neurogenic pressor episodes and future hypertension. A long-standing 
hypothesis posits that repeated neurogenic pressor episodes lead to sustained hyper -
tension by inducing cardiovascular remodeling and renal injury [31]. Dr. Julius and 
colleagues described a reproducible hypertensive response to modest compression 
of both hind limbs in dogs using a fitted suit inflated to 30 mmHg [54]. While the 
inflation produced no discernible discomfort, systolic blood pressure rose approxi-
mately 30 mmHg 60–90 min after suit inflation and was maintained for the duration 
of 6-h hind limb compression. Heart rate also rose approximately 15 beats/min dur -
ing hind limb compression. Over 9 weeks, 6 h of daily hind limb compression did 
not raise resting systolic blood pressure or heart rate but resulted in a 25–30% 
increase in left ventricular muscle mass. Thus, repeated neurogenic elevations of 
blood pressure sufficient to induce significant cardiac remodeling did not lead to 
sustained hypertension. While these experiments do not disprove the hypothesis 
B. M. Egan563
that repeated neurogenic pressor episodes lead to sustained hypertension, the find-
ings, nevertheless, raise questions.
In related studies, Julius and coworkers showed that the pressor responses to hind 
limb compression could be abolished by combined α- and β-adrenoceptor blockade 
but not by individual blockade of α- or β-adrenoceptors. In fact, in the presence of 
α-adrenoceptor blockade, dogs experienced the same hypertensive response to thigh 
cuff inflation mediated by a greater rise of cardiac output when neurogenic vasocon-
striction was constrained. Conversely, during β-adrenoceptor blockade, the usual 
pressor response was mediated by a larger rise of vascular resistance when the 
increase of cardiac output was constrained. These and other observations led Julius 
and colleagues to consider the “pressure” seeking properties of the nervous system, 
which can be satisfied with variable contributions of flow and resistance [53].
Evidence of increased sympathetic tone in human hypertension has also been 
documented in human platelets. Kjeldsen and coworkers documented increased 
thromboglobulin, reflecting increased platelet turnover, and plasma epinephrine as 
well as a correlation between these two variables in hypertensive patients [55]. In 
subsequent studies in collaboration with the Ann Arbor group, Kjeldsen docu-
mented an inverse relationship between platelet noradrenaline, a marker for 
increased sympathetic drive, and decreased β-adrenoceptor responses [56]. The data 
suggest that increased sympathetic drive increases platelet turnover. Moreover, 
platelet norepinephrine, a long-term marker of sympathetic drive, is elevated in 
hypertension and is predictive of decreased β-receptor responses. These studies pro-
vide novel methodologic confirmation of excess sympathetic drive and downregula-
tion of β-adrenoceptor responsiveness in hypertensive patients.
Summary of Dr. Julius work on increased sympathetic drive and multiple cardio-
vascular risk factors. As summarized in Fig.  35.6 [57], increased sympathetic drive, 
manifest as a faster heart rate, is strongly and positively correlated with blood pres-
sure and hyperinsulinemia as well as glucose, triglycerides, cholesterol, hematocrit, 
and body mass index, and inversely correlated with HDL cholesterol. Moreover, 
suppressed anger appears to underlie the sympathetic activation and parasympa-
thetic withdrawal, which unleash a cluster of risk factors for cardiovascular disease. 
During the next phase of his productive scientific career, Dr. Julius and colleagues 
focused efforts on preventing hypertension and its cardiovascular consequences.
Clinical trials to advance knowledge on preventing hypertension and its clinical 
consequences. Trial of Preventing Hypertension (TROPHY) [57]. In the more con-
temporary phase of his still active career, Professors Julius and colleagues con-
ducted a landmark trial on preventing hypertension in subjects with prehypertension 
as defined by resting blood pressures in the 130–139/85–89 mmHg range. While 
blood pressure in this range has been defined as prehypertension since 1939 [58], 
the 2017 Hypertension Guideline developed by the American College of Cardiology 
and the American Heart Association now defines Stage 1 hypertension by blood 
pressure values of 130–139/80–89  mmHg [59]. Given this evolution in defining 
Stage 1 hypertension, TROPHY assumes even greater significance.
In TROPHY , approximately 800 subjects with repeating clinic blood pressure 
values in the 130–139/85–89  mmHg range were randomized to lifestyle 35 Neurogenic Mechanisms in Prehypertension and Pharmacologic Approaches564
intervention and the angiotensin receptor blocker, candesartan, or to lifestyle and 
placebo control [11]. After 2 years, candesartan was withdrawn and all subjects 
were followed for 2 additional years. As shown in Fig.  35.7, during the first 2 years, 
more subjects randomized to placebo developed hypertension than those random-
ized to candesartan, 40.4% versus 13.6%, p < 0.001. Thus, active treatment with 
candesartan reduced incident hypertension by two-thirds.High
sympa thetic 
tone
(elevated heart rate) Glc: g lucose
Chol: c holester ol
BP: b lood pr essur e
BMI: body mass inde x
Hem: hema tocrit
Trig: trig lyceride
: P < 0.05
: P < 0.01
: P < 0.0001Glc
Insulin
BP
BMI
HemTrigHDLChol
Adapted from Palatini P, et al: J Hypertension 199757
Fig. 35.6 High sympathetic tone as reflected by elevated heart rate, was very highly correlated 
with elevated blood pressure and insulin, strongly related to glucose and cholesterol and signifi-
cantly related to HDL cholesterol, triglycerides, body mass index, and hematocrit
00
1 23 41.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1Candesartan
Placebo
P < 0.0001% Cumulative incidence2 Years4 Years
RR
AR
}}15.8%
9.6%
Relative Risk
Absolute Risk66%
26%
Adapted from Julius S, Nesbit MD et al: N Engl J Med. 2006 11
Fig. 35.7 Subjects with BP 130–139/85–89 randomized to candesartan (blue line) developed 
hypertension at 1/3 the rate of those on placebo during the 1st 2 years. While some “catch up” 
occurred in Years 3 and 4 when both groups received placebo, those initially on candesartan had a 
15.8% relative reduction of incident hypertension at 4 years
B. M. Egan565
At 4 years, among subjects that had taken candesartan the first 2 years, 53.2% of 
them developed hypertension as compared to 63.0% in the placebo control group, 
p < 0.001, or a 15.6% relative reduction in incident hypertension [11]. It could be argued 
that most of the benefit for hypertension prevention was lost when candesartan was 
withdrawn. However, the 15.6% relative reduction of incident hypertension 2 years after 
candesartan was withdrawn is comparable to the reduction of incident hypertension 
seen with intensive and persistent lifestyle intervention over the same time period.
Given challenges with improving lifestyle patterns in the general population, 
pharmacotherapy provides a safe alternative for hypertension prevention. In fact, 
during the four  years of TROPHY , serious adverse events occurred in 5.9% of 
patients assigned to the placebo group versus 3.5% among those randomized from 
the active treatment group. With the recent designation of Stage 1 hypertension as 
blood pressures in the 130–139/80–89 mmHg range, TROPHY is among the stud-
ies showing that blood pressure can be safely and effectively lowered in these 
individuals. More specifically, the 2017 ACC/AHA Hypertension Guideline rec-
ommends pharmacotherapy for Stage 1 hypertension when it occurs in conjunction 
with either clinical cardiovascular disease or a 10-year cardiovascular disease risk 
≥10% [58].
Valsartan, amlodipine long-term evaluation (VALUE) study. Importance of 
early blood pressure control [12]. Professor Julius was a lead investigator on this 
important clinical trial, which generated some important and unexpected insights 
into preventing cardiovascular events in subjects at high risk. Among the important, 
unexpected insights, V ALUE results indicated that differences in hypertension con-
trol during the first 3–6 months of the trial contributed to an excess of cardiovascular 
events. While conventional wisdom contends that it is important to “start low” and 
“go slow” when treating hypertension in an older, high-risk population, V ALUE 
suggested that “starting too low” with pharmacotherapy, e.g., 80 mg valsartan, and 
“going too slow” in up-titrating doses and adding other classes of antihypertensive 
medications can lead to serious clinical cardiovascular events. Thus, it is important 
to balance the adverse effects of more rapid (aggressive) hypertension control with 
the benefit of fewer cardiovascular events.
Importance of the number of antihypertensive medications [13]. Another 
important and somewhat unexpected finding of V ALUE was that among individuals 
requiring more than initial monotherapy in an attempt to control their hypertension, 
there was not a significant difference in clinical outcomes between those who did 
and did not attain hypertension control. The conventional wisdom is that the princi-
pal benefit of treating hypertension is mediated by blood pressure reduction, irre-
spective of the means by which control is attained. This iconoclastic finding in 
V ALUE has been supported by a number of studies showing that blood pressure 
control among individuals with treatment resistant hypertension leads to less than 
expected benefits of blood pressure reduction. Individuals requiring more medica-
tions to achieve hypertension control may well be a higher-risk subset with greater 
degrees of insulin resistance and target organ damage [59]. Nevertheless, data that 
they do not attain more of the expected benefits of blood pressure reduction will 
hopefully lead to insights that improve their clinical management and outcomes.35 Neurogenic Mechanisms in Prehypertension and Pharmacologic Approaches566
Importance of heart rate in treated hypertensive patients Heart rate is long 
recognized as a cardiovascular risk factor [31, 57]. Heart rate reduction with 
β-blockers is linked to improved clinical outcomes in patients with coronary heart 
disease or with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction [60, 61]. Yet, the impor -
tance of heart rate as a predictor of outcomes in a high-risk group of treated hyper -
tensive patients not selected specifically for coronary heart disease or chronic heart 
failure has not registered as a significant clinical topic prior to a re-analysis of 
V ALUE trial data (Fig. 35.8) [14].
In this insightful analysis, Dr. Julius and coworkers showed that both blood pres-
sure and heart rate significantly impacted the primary outcome of fatal and nonfatal 
heart disease and stroke. Within both the uncontrolled and the controlled subgroups 
of hypertensive patients in V ALUE, those with resting heart rate of 80 bpm and 
higher had worse outcomes than those with lower resting heart rate values.
In summary, more than 50 years of research by Professor Julius and colleagues 
has documented a key role of high levels of anger and especially suppressed anger 
in the pathogenesis of elevated blood pressure. Evidence indicates that anger acti-
vates the sympathetic nervous system, while reduce parasympathetic tone. The Ann 
Arbor group showed that this reciprocal dysfunction of the two limbs of the auto-
nomic nervous system underlies the hyperkinetic borderline hypertension and may 
be operative in neurogenic, high-renin hypertension. Dr. Julius and coworkers also 
documented a role for sympathetic activation in cardiometabolic risk and the car -
diovascular continuum. In the most recent phase of research, attention has focused 
on national and multinational studies on the prevention and treatment of hyperten-
sion, which have yielded useful insights that have important implications for hyper -
tension and cardiovascular disease prevention.
250 500 750 1000 1250 1500High HR, BP  uncontrolled
Low HR, BP  uncontrolledHigh HR, BP  controlle d
Low HR, BP  controlledCumulative primary event rate, %
Days Since Year 1014
12
10
8
6
4
2
Adapted from Julius S, et al: Am J Cardioll 2012 14
Fig. 35.8 Individuals in the upper quintile of resting heart rate (HR, ≥80 bpm) had more primary 
cardiovascular events than those with uncontrolled hypertension but resting HR in the lower four 
quintiles (<80 bpm). In multivariable hazards regression, among individuals with controlled hyper -
tension those with faster heart rates had 53% more cardiovascular events (HR 1.53 [95% CI 
1.26–1.85])
B. M. Egan567
References
 1. Harburg E, Julius S, McGinn NF, McLeod J, Hoobler SW. Personality traits and behavioral pat-
terns associated with systolic blood pressure in college males. J Chronic Dis. 1964;17:405–14.
 2. Schneider R, Egan B, Johnson EH, Drobney H, Julius S.  Anger and anxiety in borderline 
hypertension. Psychosomatic Med. 1986;48:242–8.
 3. Julius R, Pascual A, London R. Role of parasympathetic inhibition in the hyperkinetic type of 
borderline hypertension. Circulation. 1971;44:413–8.
 4. Esler M, Julius S, Randall OS, Ellis CN, Kashima T. Relation of renin status to neurogenic 
vascular resistance in borderline hypertension. Am J Cardiol. 1975;36:708–15.
 5. Esler M, Julius S, Zweifler A, Randall O, Harburg E, Gardiner H, et al. Mild high-renin essen-
tial hypertension: neurogenic human hypertension? N Engl J Med. 1977;296:405–11.
 6. Julius S, Jamerson K, Mejia A, Krause L, Schork N, Jones K. The association of borderline 
hypertension with target organ changes and higher coronary risk. Tecumseh Blood Pressure 
Study. JAMA. 1990;264:354–8.
 7. Julius S, Gudbrandsson T, Jamerson K, Andersson O. The interconnection between sympathet-
ics, microcirculation, and insulin resistance in hypertension. Blood Press. 1992;1:9–19.
 8. Julius S, Jamerson K. Sympathetics, insulin resistance and coronary risk in hypertension: the 
‘chicken-and-egg’ question. J Hypertens. 1994;12:495–502.
 9. Jamerson K, Julius S, Gudbrandsson T, Andersson O, Brant DO. Reflex sympathetic activation 
induces acute insulin resistance in the human forearm. Hypertension. 1993;21:618–23.
 10. Wilson PWF, Meigs JB. Cardiometabolic risk: a Framingham perspective. Internat J Obes. 
2008;32:S17–20.
 11. Julius S, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, Weber MA, Michelson EL, Kaciroti N, Black HR, Grimm 
RH Jr, Messerli FH, Oparil S, Schork MA. Feasibility of treating prehypertension with an 
angiotensin-receptor blocker. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:1685–97.
 12. Julius S, Kjeldsen SE, Weber M, Brunner HR, Ekman S, Hannson L, Hau T, Laragh J, McInnes 
GT, Mitchell L, Plat F, Schork A, Smith B, Zanchetti A. Outcomes in hypertensive patients at 
high cardiovascular risk treated with regimens based on valsartan or amlodipine: The V ALUE 
randomized trial. Lancet. 2004;363:2022–31.
 13. Weber MA, Julius S, Kjedlsen SE, et al. Cardiovascular outcomes in hypertensive patients 
comparing single-agent therapy with combination therapy. J Hypertens. 2012;30:2213–22.
 14. Julius S, Palatini P, Kjeldsen SE, Zanchetti A, Weber MA, McInnes GT, Brunner HR, 
Mancia G, Schork MA, Hua TA, Holzhauer B, Zappe D, Majahalme S, Jamerson K, Koylan 
N. Usefulness of heart rate to predict future cardiac events in treated patients with high-risk 
systemic hypertension. Am J Cardiol. 2012;109:685–92.
 15. Spielberger CD, Johnson EH, Russell SF, Crane RJ, Jacobs GA, Worden TJ. The experience 
and expression of anger: construction and validation of an anger expression scale. In: Chesney 
MA, Rosenman RH, editors. Anger and hostility in cardiovascular and behavioral disorders. 
New York: Hemisphere/McGraw; 1985. p. 5–30.
 16. Alexander F. Emotional factors in essential hypertension: presentation of a tentative hypoth-
esis. Psychosom Med. 1939;1:175–9.
 17. Marci CD, Glick DM, Loh R, Dougherty DD. Autonomic and prefrontal cortex responses to 
autobiographical recall of emotions. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2007;7:243–50.
 18. Levy RL, White PD, Stroud WD. Transient tachycardia: prognostic significance alone and in 
association with transient hypertension. JAMA. 1945;129:585–8.
 19. Lund-Johansen P. Hemodynamic alterations in early essential hypertension: recent advances. 
In: Gross F, Strassen, editors. Mild hypertension: recent advances. New  York, NY: Raven 
Press; 1983. p. 237–49.
 20. Julius S, Randall OS, Esler MD, Kashima T, Ellis C, Bennett J. Altered cardiac responsive-
ness and regulation in the normal cardiac output type of borderline hypertension. Circ Res. 
1975;36(6 Suppl 1):199–207.35 Neurogenic Mechanisms in Prehypertension and Pharmacologic Approaches568
 21. Messerli FH, Ventura HO, Resisin E, Dreslinski GR, Dunn FG, MacPhee AA, Frohlich 
ED.  Borderline hypertension and obesity: two prehypertensive states with elevated cardiac 
output. Circulation. 1982;66:55–60.
 22. Reisin E, Messerli FG, Ventura HO, Frohlich ED.  Renal hemodynamic studies in obesity 
hypertension. J Hypertens. 1987;5:397–400.
 23. Egan BM, Schork NJ, Weder AB. Regional hemodynamic abnormalities in overweight men. 
Focus on alpha-adrenergic vascular responses. Am J Hypertens. 1989;2(6 Part 1):428–34.
 24. Guyton AC, Coleman TG. Quantitative analysis of the pathophysiology of hypertension. Circ 
Res. 1969;24(5 Suppl):1–19.
 25. Guyton AC. Dominant role of the kidneys and accessory role of whole-body autoregulationin 
the pathogenesis of hypertension. Am J Hypertens. 1989;2:575–85.
 26. Julius S, Pascual A V , Reilly K, London R.  Abnormalities of plasma volume in borderline 
hypertension. Arch Intern Med. 1971;127:116–9.
 27. Julius S, Conway J. Hemodynamic studies in patients with borderline blood pressure eleva-
tion. Circulation. 1968;38:282–8.
 28. Cohn JN. Relationship of plasma volume changes to resistance and capacitance vessel effects 
of sympathomimetic amines and angiotensin in man. Clin Sci. 1966;30:267–78.
 29. Kjeldsen SE, Moan A, Petrin J, Weder A, Julius S. Effects of increased arterial epinephrine on 
insulin, glucose and phosphate. Blood Press. 1996;5:27–31.
 30. Julius R, Pascual A, Abbrecht P, London R.  Effect of beta-adrenergic blockade on plasma 
volume in human subjects. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1972;140:982–5.
 31. Julius S, Majahalme S. The changing face of sympathetic overactivity in hypertension. Ann 
Med. 2000;32:365–70.
 32. Hart MN, Heistad DD, Brody MJ. Effect of chronic hypertension and sympathetic denervation 
on wall/lumen ratio of cerebral vessels. Hypertension. 1980;2:419–28.
 33. Bevan RD, Tsuru H, Bevan JH. Cerebral artery mass in the rabbit is reduced by chronic sym-
pathetic denervation. Stroke. 1983;14:393–6.
 34. Mulvany MJ.  Small artery remodeling in hypertension. Basic Clin Pharm Toxicol. 
2011;110:49–55.
 35. Egan BM, Schork N, Panis R, Hinderliter A. Vascular structure enhances regional resistance 
responses in mild hypertension. J Hypertension. 1988;6(1):41–8.
 36. Folkow B. Physiological aspects of primary hypertension. Physiol Rev. 1982;62:347–503.
 37. Egan B, Panis R, Hinderliter A, Schork N, Julius S. Mechanism of increased alpha-adrenergic 
vasoconstriction in human essential hypertension. J Clin Invest. 1987;80:812–7.
 38. Anderson EA, Sinkey CA, Lawton WJ, Mark AL.  Elevated sympathetic nerve activity in 
borderline hypertensive humans: Evidence from direct intraneural recordings. Hypertension. 
1989;14:177–83.
 39. Esler M. The sympathetic system and hypertension. Am J Hypertens. 2000;13:99S–105S.
 40. Julius S, Jamerson K, Mejia A, Krause L, Schork N, Jones K. The association of borderline 
hypertension with target orgnai changes and higher coronary risk. Tecumseh Blood Pressure 
Study. JAMA. 1990;264:354–8.
 41. De Fronzo RA, Tripathy D. Skeletal muscle insulin resistance is the primary defect in type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2009;32(Suppl 2):S157–63.
 42. Pollare T, Lithell H, Selinus I, Berne C. Application of prazosin is associated with an increase 
of insulin sensitivity in obese patients with hypertension. Diabetologia. 1988;31:415–20.
 43. Berne C, Pollare T, Lithell H. Effects of antihypertensive treatment on insulin sensitivity with 
special reference to ACE inhibitors. Diabetes Care. 1991;14(Suppl 4):39–47.
 44. Jamerson KA, Smith SD, Amerena JV , Grant E, Julius S. Vasoconstriction with norepinrphrine 
causes less forearm insulin resistance than a reflex sympathetic vasoconstriction. Hypertension. 
1994;23(past 2):1006–11.
 45. Lillioja S, Young AA, Culter CL, Ivy JL, Abbott WG, Zawadzki JK, Yki-Järvinen H, Christin 
L, Secomb TW, Bogardus C.  Skeletal muscle capillary density and fiber type are possible 
determinants of in vivo insulin resistance in man. J Clin Invest. 1987;80:415–24.
B. M. Egan569
 46. MacMahon S, Peto R, Cutler J, Collins R, Sorlie P, Neaton J, Abbott R, Godwin J, Dyer A, 
Stamler J. Blood pressure, stroke, and coronary heart disease. Part I, Prolonged differences in 
blood pressure: prospective observational studies corrected for the regression dilution bias. 
Lancet. 1990;335:765–74.
 47. Willey JZ, Moon YP, Kahn E, Rodriguez CJ, Rundek T, Cheung K, Sacco FL, Elkind 
MSV .  Population attributable risks of hypertension and diabetes for cardiovascular disease 
and stroke in the Northern Manhattan Study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014;3:e001106. https://doi.
org/10.1161/JAHA.114.001106.
 48. Hall JE, Brands MW, Zappe DH, Alonso GM.  Insulin resistance, hyperinsulinemia, and 
hypertension: causes, consequences, or merely correlations? Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 
1994;208:317–29.
 49. Howard BV .  Insulin resistance and lipid metabolism. Am J Cardiol. 1990;84(Suppl 
1A):28J–32J.
 50. Pyorala K, Savolainen E, Kaukola S, Haapakoski J. Plasma insulin as a coronary heart disease 
risk factor: relationship to the other risk factors and predictive value during 9½ year follow-up 
of the Helsinki Policemen Study. Actu Med Stand Suppl. 1985;701:38–52.
 51. Ducimetiere P, Eschwege E, Papoz L, Richard JL, Claude JR, Rosselin G. Relationship of 
plasma insulin levels to the incidence of myocardial infarction and coronary heart disease 
mortality in a middle-aged population. Diabetologia. 1980;19:205–10.
 52. Palatini P, Benetos A, Grassi G, Julius S, Kjeldsen SE, Mancia G, Narkiewicz K, Parati G, 
Pessina AC, Ruilope LM, Zanchetti A.  Identification and management of the hypertensive 
patient with elevated heart rate: Statement of a European Society of Hypertension Consensus 
Meeting. J Hypertens. 2006;24:603–10.
 53. Valentini M, Julius S, Palatini P, Brook RD, Bard RL, Bisognano JD, Kaciroti N. Attenuation 
of haemodynamic, metabolic and energy expenditure responses to isoproterenol in patients 
with hypertension. J Hypertens. 2004;22:1999–2006.
 54. Julius S, Li Y , Brant D, Krause L, Buda AJ. Neurogenic pressor episodes fail to cause hyper -
tension, but do induce cardiac hypertrophy. Hypertension. 1989;13:422–9.
 55. Kjeldsen SE, Gjesdal K, Eide I, Aakesson I, Amundsen R, Foss OP, et  al. Increased beta-
thromboglobulin in essential hypertension: interactions between arterial plasma adrenaline, 
platelet function and blood lipids. Actu Med Scund. 1983;213:369–73.
 56. Kjeldsen SE, Zweifler AM, Petrin J, Wder AB, Julius S. Sympathetic nervous system involve-
ment in essential hypertension: Increased platelet noradrenaline coincides with decreased 
β-adrenoreceptor responsiveness. Blood Press. 1994;3:164–71.
 57. Palatini P, Julius S. Heart rate and the cardiovascular risk. J Hypertension. 1997;15:3–17.
 58. Aronow WS, Casey DE, Collins KJ, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/
ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management 
of high blood pressure in adults. Hypertension. 2017.
 59. Rao A, Pandya V , Whaley-Connell A. Obesity and insulin resistance in resistant hypertension: 
Implications for the kidney. Adv Chron Kid Dis. 2015;22:211–7.
 60. Kotecha D, Flather MD, Altman DG, et al. Heart rate and rhythm and the benefit of beta-
blockers in patients with heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:2885–96.
 61. Gheorghiade M, Goldstein S. β-blockers in the post-myocardial infarction patient. Circulation. 
2002;106:394–8.35 Neurogenic Mechanisms in Prehypertension and Pharmacologic Approaches571 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_36
S. C. Fuchs ( *) 
Graduate Program in Cardiology, School of Medicine, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande 
do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil 
F. D. Fuchs 
Division of Cardiology, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, School of Medicine, 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil36The PREVER Study
Sandra Costa Fuchs and Flávio Danni Fuchs
36.1  Introduction
Raised blood pressure (BP) has become the leading cause of non-transmissible 
chronic disease, particularly of cardiovascular disease. An aggregate analysis of 844 
studies, conducted in 195 countries and territories, projected that in 2015, about 3.5 
billion adults had systolic BP of at least 110 to 115 mm Hg and 874 million adults 
had systolic BP of 140 mm Hg or greater [1]. Projections from these data indicate 
that these levels BP exposed a large number of individuals to disability-adjusted life 
years (DALYs), mainly due to ischemic heart disease, followed by hemorrhagic 
stroke and ischemic stroke. Estimate based on data from World Health Organization 
regions found that about 62% of cerebrovascular disease and 49% of ischemic heart 
disease were attributable to SBP >115 mm Hg [2].
In the first decade of this century, there was an increase in the global discrepan-
cies between the prevalence of hypertension and the control rate. There was a drop 
of 2.6% in prevalence in high-income countries, versus 7.7% raise in low- and mid-
dle-income countries. Similarly, controlled hypertension increased substantially in 
high-income countries (17.9–28.4%), and less in low- and middle-income countries 
(8.4–7.7%) [3]. The trends in Brazil are similar. A meta-analysis of population-
based studies estimated a 28.7% (95% CI: 26.2–31.4%) prevalence of hypertension 
among adults [4], and 68.9% (95% CI: 64.1–73.3%) in elderlies [5], with less than 
one-third of patients having controlled BP (BP). In a cohort study conducted in 572
southern Brazil, the risk attributed to hypertension on the incidence of cardiovascu-
lar events was 61% [6].
The epidemiological transition has already taken place in Brazil, and noncom-
municable chronic diseases are already the main cause of morbidity and mortality. 
Brazilian health authorities prioritized hypertension among these problems, allocat-
ing resources to investigate strategies of reducing the consequences of hypertension. 
Among the projects funded by the Ministry of Health is the PREVER study. In this 
study, the same logistic was used to answer two questions of current interest in the 
prevention and management of hypertension: what is the effectiveness of an inter -
vention to prevent the incidence of hypertension and what is the best drug option for 
the initiation of treatment initiation. The PREVER study consisted of two random-
ized, phase III, multicenter trials: the PREVENT-PREVENTION and PREVER-
TREATMENT. The two studies are presented below.
36.2  PREVER Prevention Trial
36.2.1  Background and Aims
The risks of high BP are continuous and start at very low values, at least 115/75 mm 
Hg in adults [7]. This continuous risk of BP for cardiovascular events could not be 
used for clinical purposes, and a dichotomous definition of hypertension was there-
fore required. Older studies, with small samples, identified the risk when its abso-
lute increase was high [8]. The values went progressively down, but 60 years ago 
were still set at 160/95 mm Hg [9]. In 1977, with diagnosis based mostly on dia-
stolic BP, hypertension was diagnosed when diastolic BP was equal or higher than 
100 mm Hg [10]. Interestingly, the risks of BP between 90 and 100 mm Hg, called 
borderline hypertension at that time, were already evident, both for cardiovascular 
mortality and morbidity, as for target organ damage [11]. Treatment was proposed 
for young individuals with other risk factors or evidences of target organ damage. 
Anticipating the modern methods of BP measurements, Stevo Julius and coworkers 
recommended the treatment when the average of 14 BP measurements, taken at 
home, were 140/90 mm Hg or higher, independently of the presence of risk factors 
or target organ damage [12].
When the risks of BP below 140/90 mm Hg became evident, the term prehyper -
tension was coined. Prehypertension—SBP between 120 and 139 or diastolic BP 
between 80 and 89  mm Hg—was presented in the Seventh Report of the Joint 
National Committee (JNC 7), to identify an intermediate category of risk [13]. It 
was, somehow, equivalent to the old borderline definition for higher values. The 
higher precision in the identification of risk, accumulating evidences from dozens of 
cohort studies, and also from more precise methods of BP measurement, estab-
lished, beyond reasonable doubt, that prehypertension carries on several risks and 
should be a focus of intervention.
In addition to being a risk factor for cardiovascular disease, prehypertension 
increases the risk of developing hypertension and promotes target organ damage. In 
a cohort study conducted in the city of Porto Alegre, Brazil, four out of five 
S. C. Fuchs and F. D. Fuchs573
individuals with prehypertension developed hypertension in 10 years [14]. In the 
MONICA cohort, prehypertension was associated with risk for increasing left ven-
tricular mass, compared to normal pressure [15]. A cohort study conducted in the 
Chinese population showed a similar pattern of cardiovascular deaths attributed to 
hypertension, 51.9% (95% CI 49.6–54.3) in men and 49.1% (95% CI 46.3–51.9) in 
women. In addition, it was established the attributable risk for prehypertension, 
ranging from 13.0% (95% CI 10.9–15.1) in men and 11.5% (95% CI 9.3–13.7) in 
women [16]. In the ARIC cohort, prehypertension increased LV remodeling and 
impaired diastolic function [17].
The consequences of prehypertension prompted to the development of two trials, 
which pioneering tested the efficacy of BP-lowering agents in prehypertension. In 
the first one, participants with prehypertension stage II—130 to 139 mm Hg of SBP 
or 85 to 89 mm Hg of diastolic BP—were randomly assigned to receive 2 years of 
candesartan or placebo, followed by 2 years of placebo for all [18]. Participants who 
developed stage 1 hypertension started treatment with BP-lowering agents. Both 
groups received recommendations for lifestyle changes. The 2-year results showed 
an incidence of hypertension of 13.6% in the candesartan arm versus 40.4% in the 
placebo group (P < 0.001), with a relative risk reduction of 66.3%. At the end of the 
four-year follow-up, 63.0% participants in the placebo group developed hyperten-
sion versus 53.2% of those in the candesartan group, with a relative risk reduction 
of 15.6%. The incidence of hypertension tended to approximate after 2 years of 
drug suspension. Treatment was well tolerated [18]. In the second trial, 1008 par -
ticipants with office BP (either SBP 130–139 or DBP 85–89 mm Hg or both) were 
randomized to treatment with ramipril or a control group [19]. At the end of the 
3-year follow-up, 30.7% in the ramipril group versus 42.9% in the control group did 
not develop hypertension, with a relative risk reduction of 34.4% [19].
Although there was strong evidence in favor of the effectiveness of pharmaco-
logical prevention of hypertension in individuals with high-normal BP, a clinical 
trial was lacking to assess whether the treatment was able to reduce the incidence of 
hypertension in individuals with the full spectrum of prehypertension and whether 
it could, also, prevent target organ damage. The PREVER-PREVENTION trial was 
designed to answer these questions [20]. The study aimed to investigate whether the 
drug treatment of individuals with prehypertension would reduce the incidence of 
hypertension and left ventricular mass, assessing the tolerability to the 
intervention.
36.2.2  Methods
PREVER-Prevention was a randomized placebo-controlled trial, with blinding and 
concealment, conducted at 21 academic medical centers in Brazil. Details of the 
study can be seen elsewhere [21].
The eligibility criteria included age between 30 and 70 years, prehypertension, 
for those who not taking BP-lowering agents. Before randomization, all study par -
ticipants were enrolled in a 3-month lifestyle intervention. Advices were provided 
on weight loss, reduction in dietary intake of sodium, consumption of a DASH-type 36 The PREVER Study574
(Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) diet, and increase of physical activity. 
Participants whose mean BP was still within the prehypertension range after 
3 months of lifestyle intervention were randomized to receive a combined pill con-
taining 12.5 mg of chlorthalidone and 2.5 mg of amiloride or placebo, in a 1:1 ratio. 
Follow-up visits were done at 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, and 18 months after randomization.
The primary outcome was incidence of hypertension (systolic BP ≥140 mm Hg 
or diastolic BP ≥90 mm Hg), based on the average of 6 standardized BP measure-
ments, performed in 3 clinic visits [13, 22]. Self-reported adverse events, develop-
ment or worsening of microalbuminuria, changes in left ventricular mass (LVM), 
were secondary outcomes. Measurement of LVM was based on ECG recordings 
using Sokolow-Lyon and Cornell voltage and voltage-duration products [23, 24].
36.2.3  Main Results
A total of 730, out of 1433 participants included in the 3-month lifestyle interven-
tion phase, fulfilled the eligibility criteria for enrollment in the PREVER-
PREVENTION trial. Baseline characteristics and adherence to treatment participants 
to treatment were similar among the treatment arms. The incidence of hypertension 
was significantly lower in the chlorthalidone/amiloride group compared with pla-
cebo (hazard ratio 0.56; 95% CI 0.38–0.82; P = 0.003) (Fig.  36.1). The cumulative 
incidence of hypertension was 11.7% in the diuretic group compared with 19.5% in 
the placebo group (P = 0.004).
0
03 6 91 21 51 8 Months510152025HR=0.56 (0.38-0.82);  P=0.003 %
Placebo
Chlor thalidone+Amilor ide
Chlor thalidone +
Amilor ide (n)
Incidence (% )
Placebo (n)
Incidence (%)372 326 283
2.1
280
2.1253
2.4
260
3.5242
0.4
235
2.6240
1.7
225
4.4312
4.5
290
8.62.8
316
3.8358
Fig. 36.1 Incidence of hypertension according to treatment group during follow-up. HR indicates 
hazard ratio (reprinted with permission from the reference 20)
S. C. Fuchs and F. D. Fuchs575
The Sokolow-Lyon voltage and voltage duration product reduced by a greater 
extent in patients allocated to the active intervention than to placebo.
36.2.4  Conclusions and Perspectives
The findings of the PREVER-PREVENTION, TROPHY , and PHARAO trials con-
sistently documented the value of BP-lowering agents to prevent hypertension. The 
PREVER-PREVENTION showed this effect with a low dose of diuretics in the full 
range of prehypertension, and was the first to demonstrate beneficial effects on tar -
get organs. These studies added a piece of evidence supporting the view that prehy-
pertension is already hypertension and should be a focus of interventions aiming to 
reduce the burden of cardiovascular diseases.
36.3  PREVER Treatment Trial
36.3.1  Background and Aims
Approximately 50% of patients with hypertension can have their BP (BP) controlled 
with one BP-lowering agent. Even those who need two or more drugs usually start 
with one agent. Therefore, the choice of the first option is a critical issue, and should 
be based in reliable evidences. The major guidelines converge in the recommenda-
tions of drug choice. Despite stating that the effectiveness to lower BP is the main 
reason for the choice of the agent, guidelines gave preference for antagonists of the 
renin-angiotensin system. The last European Guidelines indicate an ACE-inhibitor or 
an ARB for a long series of conditions, such as left ventricular hypertrophy, microal-
buminuria renal dysfunction, atrial fibrillation, and diabetes mellitus, among others 
[25]. The NICE guidelines indicate ACE-inhibitors or ARB for patients younger than 
55 years, despite the complete absence of evidences to support it [26]. The better 
tolerability of ARB (the ACE-inhibitors without cough) has given to this class the 
worldwide preference in the management of hypertension.
This preference is not aligned with the best evidence. The promotion of antihy-
pertensive agents by pharmaceutical companies is sometimes based on trials with 
biased planning, presentation or interpretation of results [27]. Lisinopril, an ACE-
inhibitor, was less efficacious than chlorthalidone in the prevention of strokes in 
black participants, and cardiovascular disease and heart failure independently of 
race in the ALLHAT trial [28].
Diuretics were the only class of BP-lowering drugs that showed consistent supe-
riority over placebo in the prevention of stroke, coronary heart disease, heart failure, 
cardiovascular and all-cause mortality, as demonstrated in one report of the series of 
meta-analyses by Thomopoulos and coauthors [29]. The effect size was signifi-
cantly higher with diuretics, even against events that were prevented by other classes 
of drugs.
The main concern, however, is with the effectiveness of ARB [30, 31]. In several 
clinical trials with patients with different criteria for enrollment, such as 36 The PREVER Study576
hypertension, heart failure, diabetes, stroke, atrial fibrillation, and others, ARB were 
not superior to placebo in the prevention of cardiovascular outcomes [32–38] 
(Fig.  36.2). Studies specifically designed to investigate the effectiveness of ARB in 
the prevention of incidence of recurrence of atrial fibrillation failed to demonstrate 
their effectiveness [36–41].
These and others clinical trials were included in several meta-analysis of studies 
comparing ARB to placebo and other drugs [42–46]. Among major outcomes, ARB 
were effective in the prevention of stroke and heart failure. In none, however, there 
was evidence that ARB were more efficacious than placebo to prevent myocardial 
infarction, cardiovascular and all-cause mortality.
Another relevant issue that argues against the effectiveness of ARB is the fraud 
committed in three major studies done with these agents, which were retracted from 
the literature [47–49].
There was no trial comparing the effectiveness of ARB with diuretics in the pre-
vention of cardiovascular outcomes [50]. We could not find also a clinical trial com-
paring the BP-lowering effect of diuretics and ARB.  Therefore we decided to 
compare these classes of BP drugs in regard to their BP effects and effects on sur -
rogate outcomes, the main outcomes of the PREVER-treatment trial [51]. We chose LIFE
(losar tan)
VALUE
(Valsar tan)
ONTARGET
(telmisar tan)
SCOPE
(candesar tan)
TRANSCEND
(telmisar tan)
PROFESS
(telmisar tan)
NAVIGA TOR
(valsar tan)
ACTIVE
(irbesar tan)
ROADMAP
(olmesar tan)
ORIENT
(olmesar tan)Atcnolol
Amlodipine MI
Composite CV
Composite CV
Composite CV
Composite CVStrok e
Composite CV
Mortality CV
Mortality CVRamipr ill
Placebo
Placebo
Placebo
Placebo
Placebo
Placebo
PlaceboComposite CV0.76 (0.58–0.98)
1.19 (1.02–1.38)
1.01(0.94–1.09)
0.89 (0.76–1.06)
0.92 (0.82–1.05)
0.95 (0.86–1.04)
0.99 (0.86–1.14)
0.99 (0.91–1.08)
4.94 (1.43–17.06)
3.36 (0.93–12.07)
0.51 .5 5.0 1.0STUD Y Control Outcome RRRisk fo r
controlRisk fo r ARB
Fig. 36.2 Relative risks and 95% CIs for the occurrence of cardiovascular outcomes in clinical 
trials comparing angiotensin receptor blocker with other drugs or placebo in patients with hyper -
tension or high cardiovascular risk [Reprinted with permission from 30] (references of the indi-
vidual studies are cited in the text)
S. C. Fuchs and F. D. Fuchs577
the association of chlorthalidone with amiloride to compare with losartan. The pref-
erence for chlorthalidone was based on its superiority over hydrochlorothiazide in 
the prevention of cardiovascular events in a network meta-analysis [52], and on its 
higher and longer BP-lowering effect [53–55]. The association of amiloride aimed 
to antagonize the hypokalemia induced by chlorthalidone [56], which promotes a 
mild increase in blood glucose [57]. The Pathway-3 trial showed that the prevention 
of losses of potassium with amiloride prevented the increase in serum glucose in a 
glucose tolerance test, besides having a BP-lowering effect [58].
36.3.2  Methods
Details of the PREVER-TREATMENT trial were published on its protocol [59] and 
in the main report [51]. It was a randomized, double-blind, controlled trial, which 
included 655 participants who were followed for 18 months in 21 Brazilian aca-
demic centers. Trial participants were adult volunteers aged 30–70 years with stage 
I hypertension (BP 140–159 or 90–99 mm Hg), and no current use of BP-lowering 
medication. To be enrolled in the drug phase of the trial, participants should have 
uncontrolled BP after 3 months of a lifestyle intervention phase (recommendations 
for weight loss, dietary sodium reduction, adoption of a DASH-type diet, physical 
activity, and smoking cessation). Participants were randomized to 12.5/2.5 mg of 
chlorthalidone/amiloride (N = 333) or 50 mg of losartan (N = 322). If BP remained 
uncontrolled after 3 months, study medication dose was doubled, and if uncon-
trolled after 6 months, amlodipine (5 and 10 mg) and propranolol (40 and 80 mg 
BID) were added as open label drugs in a progressive fashion.
The primary outcome was difference in mean BP between the two treatment 
groups during follow-up. The proportion of patients with controlled hypertension, 
use of non-study BP-lowering medications, incidence of adverse events, develop-
ment or worsening of microalbuminuria and left ventricular mass estimated by ECG 
criteria were additional outcomes. Fatal and nonfatal major cardiovascular events 
were secondary outcomes.
36.3.3  Main Results
The mean difference in systolic BP during 18 months of follow-up was 2.3 (95% CI: 
1.2 to 3.3) mm Hg favoring chlorthalidone/amiloride. Compared to those random-
ized to diuretic, more participants allocated to losartan had their initial dose doubled 
and more of them used add-on antihypertensive medication (Fig.  36.3). Levels of 
blood glucose, glycosylated hemoglobin, and incidence of diabetes were no differ -
ent between the two treatment groups. Serum potassium was lower and serum cho-
lesterol was higher in the diuretic arm. Microalbuminuria tended to be higher in 
patients with diabetes allocated to losartan (28.5  ±  40.4 vs. 16.2  ±  26.7  mg, 
P = 0.09).36 The PREVER Study578
Systolic BP
(mmHg)145
135
Losar tan
Chlor thalidone/
amilor ide
Chlor thalidone/ (n)
amilor ideDiastolic BP
(mmHg)125
95
85
75P < 0.001
P = 0.032
Basal
333
322 298
292
6
1275
194
80
6
2266
159
106
33
5
1260
141
120
49
9
6247
126
122299
128
140
49
23
10
3
3149
14
10
112.5/2.5
25.0/5.0
Amlodipine
Propranolol5.0
10.0
40.0
80.0
No tr ial dr ug (ITT)
Losar tan (n)304
299
4 77
292
21 27
9
1
11 1
275 411 1938 36106 118 126210 186 165 154 160288Follow-up (months)
278 270 269 3103th 6th 9th 12th 15th 18th
50
100
5.0 Amlodipine
Propranolol
No tr ial dr ug (ITT)10.0
40.0
80.0
Fig. 36.3 Systolic and diastolic BP values by study group during follow-up. The number of par -
ticipants evaluated at each visit and the number who were treated with the higher dosage of their 
assigned study drug as well as the number that received a prescription for treatment with an open 
label drug is shown at each visit [reprinted with permission from the reference 51]
S. C. Fuchs and F. D. Fuchs579
36.3.4  Perspectives
The greater reduction in BP with treatment based on a combination of chlorthali-
done and amiloride compared to losartan, together with the superiority in the pre-
vention of cardiovascular outcomes, recommend diuretics as the first option for the 
management of hypertension. Since effective treatments for hypertension are 
increasingly demanded, it is prudent to start antihypertensive treatment with more 
efficacious drugs [8].
Acknowledgments  Sources of Funding: The Ministry of Health, Division of Science and 
Technology (DECIT), and Ministry of Science and Technology, Brazilian Innovation Agency 
(FINEP) (number 01080606/01), National Counsel of Technological and Scientific Development 
(CNPq), National Institute of Health Technology Assessment (IATS), and Hospital de Clinicas de 
Porto Alegre (FIPE-GPPG: 08621), RS, Brazil sponsored the PREVER study.
References
 1. Forouzanfar MH, Liu P, Roth GA, Ng M, Biryukov S, Marczak L, et al. Global burden of 
hypertension and SBP of at least 110 to 115 mm hg, 1990–2015. JAMA. 2017;317:165–82.
 2. World Health Report. Reducing risks, promoting healthy life. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2002. p. 2002.
 3. Mills KT, Bundy JD, Kelly TN, Reed JE, Kearney PM, Reynolds K, Chen J, He J. Global 
disparities of hypertension prevalence and control: a systematic analysis of population-based 
studies from 90 countries. Circulation. 2016;134:441–50.
 4. Picon RV , Fuchs FD, Moreira LB, Riegel G, Fuchs SC. Trends in prevalence of hypertension 
in Brazil: a systematic review with meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2012;7:e48255.
 5. Picon RV , Fuchs FD, Moreira LB, Fuchs SC. Prevalence of hypertension among elderly per -
sons in urban Brazil: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Am J Hypertens. 2013;26:541–8.
 6. Moraes RS, Fuchs FD, Moreira LB, Wiehe M, Pereira GM, Fuchs SC. Risk factors for cardio-
vascular disease in a Brazilian population-based cohort study. Int J Cardiol. 2003;90:205–11.
 7. Prospective Studies Collaboration. Age-specific relevance of usual BP to vascular mortality: 
a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 
2002;360:1903–13.
 8. Fuchs FD. Essentials of hypertension. New York: Springer; 2017.
 9. World Health Organization. Expert Committee on Cardiovascular Diseases and Hypertension & 
World Health Organization. Hypertension and coronary heart disease: classification and criteria 
for epidemiological studies, first report of the Expert Committee on Cardiovascular Diseases 
and Hypertension, Geneva, 13–18 October 1958. Geneva: World Health Organization; 1959. 
http://www.who.int/iris/handle/10665/4043.
 10. Julius S. Classification of hypertension. In: Genest J, Koiw E, Kuchel O, editors. Hypertension. 
New York: McGraw-Hill; 1977. p. 9–12.
 11. Julius S.  Borderline hypertension. In: Genest J, Koiw E, Kuchel O, editors. Hypertension. 
New York: McGraw-Hill; 1977. p. 630–40.
 12. Julius S, Ellis CN, Pascual A V , Matice M, Hansson L, Hunyor SN, et al. Home BP determina-
tion. Value in borderline (“labile”) hypertension. JAMA. 1974;229:663–6.36 The PREVER Study580
 13. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, et al. The seventh 
report of the joint National Committee on prevention, detection, evaluation, and treatment of 
high BP: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003;289:2560–71.
 14. Moreira LB, Fuchs SC, Wiehe M, Gus M, Moraes RS, Fuchs FD. Incidence of hypertension in 
Porto Alegre, Brazil: a population-based study. J Hum Hypertens. 2008;22:48–50.
 15. Markus MR, Stritzke J, Lieb W, Mayer B, Luchner A, Döring A, et al. Implications of persis-
tent prehypertension for ageing-related changes in left ventricular geometry and function: the 
MONICA/KORA Augsburg study. J Hypertens. 2008;26:2040–9.
 16. He J, Gu D, Chen J, Wu X, Kelly TN, Huan J. Premature deaths attributable to BP in China: a 
prospective cohort study. Lancet. 2009;374:1765–72.
 17. Santos AB, Gupta DK, Bello NA, Gori M, Claggett B, Fuchs FD, Shah AM, Coresh J, Sharrett 
AR, Cheng S, Solomon SD.  Prehypertension is associated with abnormalities of cardiac 
structure and function in the atherosclerosis risk in communities study. Am J Hypertens. 
2016;29:568–74.
 18. Julius S, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, Weber MA, Michelson EL, Kaciroti N, Black HR, Grimm RH 
Jr, Messerli FH, Oparil S, Schork MA, Trial of Preventing Hypertension (TROPHY) Study 
Investigators. Feasibility of treating prehypertension with an angiotensin-receptor blocker. N 
Engl J Med. 2006;354:1685–97.
 19. Lüders S, Schrader J, Berger J, Unger T, Zidek W, Böhm M, Middeke M, Motz W, Lübcke 
C, Gansz A, Brokamp L, Schmieder RE, Trenkwalder P, Haller H, Dominiak P, PHARAO 
Study Group. The PHARAO study: prevention of hypertension with the angiotensin-con-
verting enzyme inhibitor ramipril in patients with high-normal BP: a prospective, ran-
domized, controlled prevention trial of the German Hypertension League. J Hypertens. 
2008;26:1487–96.
 20. Fuchs SC, Poli-de-Figueiredo CE, Figueiredo Neto JA, Scala LC, Whelton PK, Mosele F, de 
Mello RB, Vilela-Martin JF, Moreira LB, Chaves H, Mota Gomes M, de Sousa MR, Silva RP, 
Castro I, Cesarino EJ, Jardim PC, Alves JG, Steffens AA, Brandão AA, Consolim-Colombo 
FM, de Alencastro PR, Neto AA, Nóbrega AC, Franco RS, Sobral Filho DC, Bordignon 
A, Nobre F, Schlatter R, Gus M, Fuchs FC, Berwanger O, Fuchs FD.  Effectiveness of 
Chlorthalidone Plus Amiloride for the prevention of hypertension: the PREVER-prevention 
randomized clinical trial. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e004248.
 21. Fuchs FD, Fuchs SC, Moreira LB, Gus M, Nobrega AC, Poli-de-Figueiredo CE, Mion D, 
Bortoloto L, Consolim-Colombo F, Nobre F, Coelho EB, Vilela-Martin JF, Moreno H Jr, 
Cesarino EJ, Franco R, Brandão AA, de Sousa MR, Ribeiro AL, Jardim PC, Neto AA, Scala 
LC, Mota M, Chaves H, Alves JG, Filho DC, Pereira e Silva R, Neto JA, Irigoyen MC, Castro 
I, Steffens AA, Schlatter R, de Mello RB, Mosele F, Ghizzoni F, Berwanger O. Prevention 
of hypertension in patients with prehypertension: protocol for the PREVER-prevention trial. 
Trials. 2011;12:65.
 22. ESH/ESC Task Force for the Management of Arterial Hypertension. 2013 Practice guidelines 
for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) 
and the European Society of Cardiology (ESC): ESH/ESC Task Force for the Management of 
Arterial Hypertension. J Hypertens. 2013;31:1925–38.
 23. Sokolow M, Lyon TP. The ventricular complex in left ventricular hypertrophy as obtained by 
unipolar precordial and limb leads. Am Heart J. 1949;37:161–86.
 24. Okin PM, Roman MI, Devereux BB, Borer JS, KIigtieId P. Electrocardiographic diagnosis 
of left ventricular hypertrophy by the time-voltage integral of the QRS. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1994;23:133–40.
 25. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redon J, Zanchetti A, Böhm M, et al. ESH/ESC guide-
lines for the management of arterial hypertension. J Hypertens. 2013;2013(31):1281–57.
 26. Krause T, Lovibond K, Caulfield M, McCormack T, Williams B.  Guideline Development 
Group Management of hypertension: summary of NICE guidance. BMJ. 2011;343:d4891.
 27. Fuchs FD. The corporate bias and the molding of prescription practices: the case of hyperten-
sion. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2009;42:224–8.
S. C. Fuchs and F. D. Fuchs581
 28. The Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT). 
Major outcomes in high-risk hypertensive patients randomized to angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitor or calcium channel blocker vs diuretic. JAMA. 2002;288:2981–97.
 29. Thomopoulos C, Parati G, Zanchetti A. Effects of BP lowering on outcome incidence in hyper -
tension: 4. Effects of various classes of antihypertensive drugs--overview and meta-analyses. J 
Hypertens. 2015;33:195–211.
 30. Fuchs FD. The role of angiotensin receptor blockers in the prevention of cardiovascular and 
renal disease: time for reassessment? Evid Based Med. 2013;18:44–7.
 31. Fuchs FD, DiNicolantonio JJ. Angiotensin receptor blockers for prevention of cardiovascular 
disease: where does the evidence stand? Open Heart. 2015;2:e000236.
 32. Lithell H, Hansson L, Skoog I, Elmfeldt D, Hofman A, Olofsson B, et  al., SCOPE Study 
Group. The Study on Cognition and Prognosis in the Elderly (SCOPE): principal results of a 
randomized double-blind intervention trial. J Hypertens. 2003;21:875–86.
 33. Yusuf S, Sleight P, Anderson C, Teo K, Copland I, Ramos B, et al., TRANSCEND Investigators. 
Effects of the angiotensin-receptor blocker telmisartan on cardiovascular events in high-risk 
patients intolerant to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: a randomized controlled trial. 
Lancet. 2008;372:1174–83.
 34. Yusuf S, Diener HC, Sacco RL, Cotton D, Ôunpuu S, Lawton WA, et al., PRoFESS Study 
Group. Telmisartan to prevent recurrent stroke and cardiovascular events. N Engl J Med. 
2008;359:1225–37.
 35. McMurray JJ, Holman RR, Haffner SM, Bethel A, Holzhauer B, Hua TA, et al., NA VIGATOR 
Study Group. Effect of valsartan on the incidence of diabetes and cardiovascular events. N 
Engl J Med. 2010;362:1477–90.
 36. Yusuf S, Healey JS, Pogue J, Chrolavicius S, Flather M, Hart RG, et al., ACTIVE I Investigators. 
Irbesartan in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:928–38.
 37. Haller H, Ito S, Izzo JL Jr, Januszewicz A, Katayama S, Menne J, et al., ROADMAP Trial 
Investigators. Olmesartan for the delay or prevention of microalbuminuria in type 2 diabetes. 
N Engl J Med. 2011;364:907–17.
 38. Imai E, Chan JC, Ito S, Yamasaki T, Kobayashi F, Haneda H, et al. ORIENT study inves-
tigators. Effects of olmesartan on renal and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes 
with overt nephropathy: a multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled study. Diabetologia. 
2011;54:2978–86.
 39. Disertori M, Latini R, Barlera S, Franzosi MG, Staszewsky L, Maggioni AP, et al., GISSI-AF 
Investigators. Valsartan for prevention of recurrent atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360:1606–17.
 40. Goette A, Schön N, Kirchhof P, Breithardt G, Fetsch T, Häusler KG, et  al. Angiotensin 
II-Antagonist in Paroxysmal Atrial Fibrillation (ANTIPAF)-Trial. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol. 2012;5:43–51.
 41. Yamashita T, Inoue H, Okumura K, Kodama I, Aizawa Y , Atarashi H, et al. Randomized trial 
of angiotensin II-receptor blocker versus dihydropiridine calcium channel blocker in the treat-
ment of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation with hypertension ( J-RHYTHM II Study). Europace. 
2011;13:473–9.
 42. Bangalore S, Kumar S, Wetterslev J, Messerli FH. Angiotensin receptor blockers and risk of 
myocardial infarction: meta-analyses and trial sequential analyses of 147 020 patients from 
randomised trials. BMJ. 2011;342:d2234.
 43. van Vark LC, Bertrand M, Akkerhuis KM, Brugts JJ, Fox K, Mourad JJ, Boersma 
E. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors reduce mortality in hypertension: a meta-anal-
ysis of randomized clinical trials of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors involv-
ing 158 998 patients. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2088–97.
 44. Cheng J, Zhang W, Zhang X, Han F, Li X, He X, Li Q, Chen J. Effect of angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers on all-cause mortality, cardiovascular 
deaths, and cardiovascular events in patients with diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis. JAMA 
Intern Med. 2014;174:773–85.36 The PREVER Study582
 45. Elgendy IY , Huo T, Chik V , Pepine CJ, Bavry AA.  Efficacy and safety of angiotensin 
receptor blockers in older patients: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am J Hypertens. 
2015;28:576–85.
 46. Bangalore S, Fakheri R, Wandel S, Toklu B, Wandel J, Messerli FH. Renin angiotensin system 
inhibitors for patients with stable coronary artery disease without heart failure: systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. BMJ. 2017;356:j4.
 47. Retraction. Combination treatment of angiotensin-II receptor blocker and angiotensin-convert-
ing-enzyme inhibitor in non-diabetic renal disease (COOPERATE): a randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2009;374:1226.
 48. Retraction. Valsartan in a Japanese population with hypertension and other cardiovascular dis-
ease (JIKEI HEART STUDY): a randomised, open-label, blinded endpoint morbidity-mortal-
ity study. Lancet. 2013;382:843.
 49. Retraction. Effects of valsartan on morbidity and mortality in uncontrolled hypertensive 
patients with high cardiovascular risks: KYOTO HEART Study. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:1023.
 50. Thomopoulos C, Parati G, Zanchetti A. Effects of BP lowering on outcome incidence in hyper -
tension: 5. Head-to-head comparisons of various classes of antihypertensive drugs – overview 
and meta-analyses. J Hypertens. 2015;33:1321–41.
 51. Fuchs FD, Scala LC, Vilela-Martin JF, Bandeira-de-Mello R, Mosele F, Whelton PK, et al. 
Effectiveness of chlorthalidone/amiloride versus losartan in patients with stage I hypertension: 
results from the PREVER-TREATMENT randomized trial. J Hypertens. 2016;34:798–806.
 52. Roush GC, Holford TR, Guddati AK. Chlorthalidone compared with hydrochlorothiazide in 
reducing cardiovascular events: systematic review and network meta-analyses. Hypertension. 
2012;59:1110–7.
 53. Ernst ME, Carter BL, Goerdt CJ, Steffensmeier JJ, Phillips BB, Zimmerman MB, et  al. 
Comparative antihypertensive effects of hydrochlorothiazide and chlorthalidone on ambula-
tory and office BP. Hypertension. 2006;47:352–8.
 54. Peterzan MA, Hardy R, Chaturvedi N, Hughes AD. Meta-analysis of dose-response relation-
ships for hydrochlorothiazide, chlorthalidone, and bendroflumethiazide on BP, serum potas-
sium, and urate. Hypertension. 2012;59:1104–9.
 55. Pareek AK, Messerli FH, Chandurkar NB, Dharmadhikari SK, Godbole A V , Kshirsagar PP, 
et al. Efficacy of low-dose chlorthalidone and hydrochlorothiazide as assessed by 24-h ambu-
latory BP monitoring. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:379–89.
 56. Guerrero P, Fuchs FD, Moreira LM, Martins VM, Bertoluci C, Fuchs SC, et al. BP-lowering 
efficacy of amiloride versus enalapril as add-on drugs in patients with uncontrolled BP receiv-
ing hydrochlorothiazide. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2008;30:553–64.
 57. Zillich AJ, Garg J, Basu S, Bakris GL, Carter BL. Thiazide diuretics, potassium, and the devel-
opment of diabetes: a quantitative review. Hypertension. 2006;48:1–6.
 58. Brown MJ, Williams B, Morant SV , Webb DJ, Caulfield MJ, Cruickshank JK, et al. Effect of 
amiloride, or amiloride plus hydrochlorothiazide, versus hydrochlorothiazide on glucose toler -
ance and BP (PATHWAY-3): a parallel-group, double-blind randomised phase 4 trial. Lancet 
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2016;4:136–47.
 59. Fuchs FD, Fuchs SC, Moreira LB, Gus M, Nóbrega AC, Poli-de-Figueiredo CE, et al. A com-
parison between diuretics and angiotensin receptor blocker agents in patients with stage I 
hypertension (PREVER-treatment trial): study protocol for a randomized double blind con-
trolled trial. Trials. 2011;12:53.
S. C. Fuchs and F. D. FuchsPart VII
Management of Prehypertension585 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_37
A. C. Cameron · G. Rossitto · N. N. Lang · R. M. Touyz ( *) 
Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, British Heart Foundation Glasgow 
Cardiovascular Reserach Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
e-mail: rhian.touyz@glasgow.ac.uk37Antihypertensive Drugs and Vascular 
Health
Alan C. Cameron, Giacomo Rossitto, Ninian N. Lang, 
and Rhian M. Touyz
Key Points 
• Hypertension is characterised by structural remodelling and endothelial 
dysfunction
• Antihypertensive drugs that target vascular health appear to be most efficacious 
in reducing cardiovascular events
• New blood pressure lowering drugs may also promote vascular health
37.1  Introduction
Hypertension is the most important modifiable risk factor for cardiovascular disease 
[1, 2] and effective blood pressure (BP) control is a priority to prevent significant 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality [2]. Hypertension is associated with struc-
tural, mechanical and functional changes of the vascular system that contribute to 
increased arterial stiffness, reduced elasticity, increased vascular tone and endothe-
lial dysfunction [1, 3].
Hypertension-associated cardiovascular disease can be prevented or ameliorated 
by antihypertensive drugs through BP lowering and direct effects on target organs. 
Some antihypertensive drugs, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors (ACEIs), angiotensin II (Ang II) receptor blockers (ARBs) and some 586
diuretics, particularly mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRAs), may have a 
direct effect on cardiac, renal and vascular function. Accordingly, drugs that lower 
BP and are organ-protective may have added benefits. Targeting the vascular system 
may prevent or repair vascular damage and promote vascular health [3]. Here we 
highlight vascular changes that characterise hypertension and discuss potential ben-
efits of targeting vascular health from a therapeutic viewpoint.
37.2  Vascular Biology of Hypertension
Hypertension is characterised by endothelial dysfunction, vascular remodelling, 
inflammation, calcification and arterial stiffness (Fig.  37.1) [1, 3]. These changes 
reduce the ability of arteries to adapt to tissue oxygen demands and culminate in 
target organ damage with associated ischaemia, infarction and injury [1]. The over -
all phenotype depends on interacting factors including genetics, physiological sys-
tems, diet, smoking, diabetes, dyslipidaemia and obesity [1, 4, 5]. When combined 
with pro-hypertensive factors there is vascular injury, arterial stiffening and early 
vascular ageing [1].
The pro-hypertensive phenotype involves activation of the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system (RAAS), inflammation and oxidative stress, which contribute to 
/_0173 Ang II, /_0173 ET-1
RAAS Activation
Salt
Lifestyle factors
RemodellingApoptosis
ProliferationArterial stiffness
Fibrosis
CalcificationEndothelial
dysfunctionVascular
inflammationOxidative stress
¯NO bioavailability/_0173 Vasoconstriction
¯ Vasodilatation
Hypertension
Fig. 37.1 Schematic of factors that can contribute to hypertension-associated vascular changes: 
pro-inflammatory, pro-fibrotic, redox-sensitive and growth/apoptotic pathways cause structural, 
functional and mechanical changes with remodelling, calcification and endothelial dysfunction. 
RAAS renin angiotensin aldosterone system, Ang II angiotensin II, ET-1 endothelin-1, NO nitric 
oxide
A. C. Cameron et al.587
vascular injury. Molecular and cellular mechanisms implicated in these effects 
include reduced nitric oxide (NO) production, increased ROS generation, pro-
inflammatory and pro-fibrotic transcription factor activation, reduced collagen turn-
over, vascular calcification, smooth muscle cell proliferation and extracellular 
matrix (ECM) remodelling [1, 3]. This is exacerbated by increased Ang II, endothe-
lin-1 (ET-1) and aldosterone, which stimulate pro-fibrotic and mitogenic signalling 
cascades. Increased p38mitogen-activated protein kinases (p38MAPK), extracellu-
lar signal regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2) and transforming growth factor-β (TGF-
β)/SMAD, galectin-3 and dysregulation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and 
tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) contribute to ECM remodelling and 
further vascular fibrosis [1].
37.2.1  The Extracellular Matrix and Vascular Fibrosis
The ECM is a fundamental component of connective tissue surrounding cells that 
maintains cellular and vascular integrity, as well as playing a critical role in cell 
signalling and regulation of cell-cell interactions. The relative quantities of collagen 
and elastin determine vascular biomechanical properties [1, 6, 7]. MMPs and TIMPs 
regulate the dynamic turnover of these components in the ECM and any imbalance 
leads to excess protein deposition, particularly collagen and fibronectin. Such depo-
sition, along with calcification and collagen cross-linking by advanced glycation 
end-products [1], contributes to vascular fibrosis and stiffening (Fig.  37.2) [1]. 
Fibrosis initially occurs as a reversible and adaptive repair process, which pro-
gresses into the neighbouring interstitial spaces with progressive loss of elasticity 
[1]. Excessive fibrosis replaces parenchymal tissue, resulting in tissue fibrosis and 
target organ damage affecting the heart, brain and kidney. The major clinical conse-
quences of these processes include heart failure, cerebrovascular disease, ischaemic 
heart disease and renal failure [1].
37.2.2  Oxidative Stress
Oxidative stress contributes to many molecular and cellular processes that evoke the 
vascular changes associated with hypertension. These include pro-inflammatory 
responses, oxidative modification of proteins, fibrosis and calcification, altered cal-
cium homeostasis and redox-sensitive pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic transcription 
factor activation. A state of chronic, low-grade inflammation develops, which is regu-
lated by enzyme systems that include NADPH oxidases (Nox) upregulation, endothe-
lial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) uncoupling and excessive O 2− production by various 
Noxs and mitochondrial oxidases, resulting in endothelial dysfunction and vascular 
remodelling observed in hypertension [3 , 8–11]. While xanthine oxidase also repre-
sents a source of ROS within the vasculature and may contribute to oxidative stress 
associated with hypertension, its precise role remains to be fully defined. [12]37 Antihypertensive Drugs and Vascular Health588
37.2.3  Salt and Inflammation
Animal models in which the “salt-sensitivity of blood pressure” trait[13] was inbred 
[14] led to identification of multiple key players in the compensatory pressure-natri-
uresis renal axis, including the RAAS, ET-1, and oxidative stress among many oth-
ers, which have been reviewed elsewhere [15]. Beyond expansion of extracellular 
fluid volume, salt appears to exert a direct effect on vascular function, particularly 
via imbalance between pro-fibrotic TGF-β and NO availability [16, 17], generation 
of oxidative stress [17–20] and induction of vascular hypertrophy [21]. In line with 
such evidence, recent studies point to discrete accumulation of sodium in tissue 
microenvironments [22–25], thus suggesting a direct effect of local/perivascular 
sodium storage in promoting vascular dysfunction [26]. Moreover, excess salt acti-
vates multiple immune mediators [27] that have emerged as key determinants of 
vascular health and hypertension via pro-inflammatory and, ultimately, pro-fibrotic 
mediators [28, 29]. Accumulation of salt in microenvironments might amplify this 
pro-inflammatory effect [30].
Ang II
ET-1Aldosterone
Other
hypertensive
factorsMMPs
Galectin 3Active TGFβ
TGFβ
receptor MAPK
SMAD2/3 SMAD2/3P
Collagen
CollagenROS
CTGF
TGF-β1
CTGF
Fibrosis
Arterial stiffness
RemodellingProteoglycansFibronectinInactive TGFβECMECM
turnoverTIMP
MMPVSMC
Salt
Fig. 37.2 Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodelling in hypertension. Angiotensin II (Ang II), aldo-
sterone, endothelin-1 (ET-1), salt and other hypertensive factors promote ECM remodelling through 
activation of transforming growth factor-β  (TGF-β ), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and 
SMAD pathways and reactive oxygen species (ROS). This leads to imbalance in tissue inhibitors of 
metalloproteinases (TIMP), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) and connective tissue growth factor 
(CTGF) activation and upregulation of galectin-3. Collagen, fibronectin and proteoglycan deposi-
tion is increased, causing fibrosis, arterial stiffness and remodelling. Adapted from Harvey, et al. [1 ]
A. C. Cameron et al.589
37.3  Endothelial Function
The endothelium plays an essential role in vascular function through release of bio-
logically active substances that influence vascular tone [3, 31]. NO is the best char -
acterised relaxing factor and is derived via NOS which is constitutively active in 
endothelial cells [32–35]. NO is also released by neurohumoral mediators such as 
acetylcholine, bradykinin and by mechanical shear stress [31]. The endothelium 
also releases endogenous vasoconstrictors such as ET-1 [31, 36, 37]. The healthy 
endothelium has a vasodilator, anti-inflammatory and anti-thrombotic phenotype. 
However dysfunctional endothelium is pro-inflammatory, pro-thrombotic and has 
impaired vasodilator responses [3]. Consequently, endothelial dysfunction is central 
in the phenotypical changes associated with hypertension [38].
37.3.1  Assessing Endothelial Function
Endothelial function can be assessed by various methods including brachial artery 
flow-mediated dilatation (FMD) or venous occlusion plethysmography [38, 39]. 
These approaches measure vasomotor responses to pharmacological or mechanical 
stimuli [38]. NO and endothelium-derived hyperpolarising factor (EDHF) are funda-
mental mediators of endothelium-dependent vasodilatation [3 , 38]. Reduced NO bio-
availability is a key characteristic of endothelial dysfunction [3 ]. Endothelial 
dysfunction can also be examined at the cellular and molecular level by assessing 
endothelial cell proliferation, vascular permeability and leucocyte/endothelial cell 
interactions [40]. Endothelial microparticles have recently emerged as a novel bio-
marker of endothelial function [40]. Severity of hypertension correlates with impaired 
endothelial function and antihypertensive therapies which improve endothelial func-
tion appear to be associated with reduced cardiovascular risk [38, 41, 42].
37.3.2  Hypertension and Endothelial Dysfunction
As outlined, reduced NO bioavailability is central to the pathophysiology of hyper -
tension-associated endothelial dysfunction, due in large part from reduced NO pro-
duction and NO inactivation due to oxidative stress and vascular inflammation [38, 
40, 43]. This promotes vasoconstriction and contributes to local inflammatory 
responses, leucocyte adhesion, vascular remodelling and arterial stiffness. Additional 
factors contributing to reduced NO bioavailability include elevated concentrations 
of endogenous NO inhibitors, eNOS uncoupling and altered signal transduction 
[40]. Deficiency in the substrate for NOS (L-arginine), as recently observed in asso-
ciation with increased urea synthesis in the context of a high salt diet [44], also 
limits NO production.
Vasoconstrictors such as ET-1 and Ang II may also contribute to endothelial 
dysfunction in hypertension [31]. An imbalance between NO and ET-1 systems may 
result in increased ET-1 activity and vasoconstriction [31, 45, 46], while Ang II 37 Antihypertensive Drugs and Vascular Health590
interacts with the NO system to activate Noxs which contribute to oxidative stress 
[31, 47, 48]. ROS scavengers restore NO production and improve endothelial func-
tion in hypertension [40]. This supports the contribution of oxidative stress to 
hypertension-associated endothelial dysfunction and the benefits of targeting these 
changes with measures to restore antioxidant balance [40]. While antioxidant ther -
apy has not yet been proven effective at reducing cardiovascular risk in patients, this 
may reflect the fact that most antioxidant approaches have focused on quenching 
ROS [49]. A more effective approach may be to target the source of ROS produc-
tion, for example, inhibiting Nox activity.
37.3.3  Endothelial Dysfunction and Atherosclerosis
Endothelial dysfunction contributes to platelet aggregation, vascular smooth muscle 
cell proliferation and monocyte adhesion which are involved in the progression of 
atherosclerosis, plaque rupture and thrombosis [31, 50–53]. This is a key mecha-
nism through which endothelial dysfunction can increase risk of myocardial infarc-
tion and stroke in patients with hypertension.
37.4  Vascular Remodelling
The remodelling of small arteries in hypertension is associated with increased media 
thickness and can be eutrophic or hypertrophic (Fig.  37.3). In eutrophic remodel-
ling, which is generally found is essential (primary) hypertension, the media:lumen 
ratio is increased but the media cross-sectional area is not. Hypertrophic remodel-
ling is typically found with secondary forms of hypertension and is characterised by 
an increase in both media:lumen ratio and media cross-sectional area [54]. 
Mechanisms contributing to eutrophic remodelling include expansion of the extra-
cellular matrix with collagen deposition and low-grade inflammation that results in 
vascular fibrosis and increased arterial stiffening [54–60].
37.5  Arterial Stiffness
Hypertension-associated arterial stiffening is a result of altered vascular contraction 
and dilatation, fibrosis, ECM remodelling, cytoskeletal organisation, pro-inflamma-
tory responses and oxidative stress [1 ]. Underlying processes involve dysregulation of 
endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells, upregulation of adaptive immune 
responses, vascular smooth muscle cell growth and migration, changes in 
collagen:elastin ratio and vascular calcification [1 , 3]. Structural changes result in 
reduced arterial compliance, elasticity and increased arterial stiffness. This demands 
greater force and further increases in BP which place an increased work load on the 
myocardium and result in left ventricular hypertrophy [3 ]. Methods to assess arterial 
stiffness include pulse wave velocity (PWV), pulse wave analysis, augmentation 
A. C. Cameron et al.591
index (AIx), 24  h ambulatory BP monitoring and brachial artery FMD [1 , 61]. 
Increased PWV occurs in the prehypertensive phase, suggesting that vascular changes 
may precede the onset of established hypertension [3 ] and PWV may be a useful tool 
to identify patients in the early prehypertensive phase.
37.6  Why Should We Target the Vascular System 
in the Treatment of Hypertension?
The endothelium is an important early target of hypertension and endothelial dys-
function is a risk marker for future cardiovascular events [40]. Targeting the vascu-
lar changes associated with hypertension should therefore be a focus of treatment, 
in addition to reducing BP (Fig.  37.4).[31, 40] Antihypertensive agents with the 
capacity to reverse endothelial dysfunction may reverse or prevent the progression 
of atherosclerosis and reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease [31].
ACEIs, ARBs and calcium channel blockers (CCBs) have all been shown to improve 
endothelial function with associated improvements in markers of oxidative stress [40]. 
ACEIs and ARBs reduce the production of ROS, while CCBs have antioxidant effects 
through improvements in the cellular redox and antioxidant state (Table  37.1) [31]. 
β-Blockers, despite lowering BP, generally do not improve endothelial function. 
Nebivolol and carvedilol are the exceptions, since nebivolol has NO donor properties 
and carvedilol may act as a scavenger of oxygen free radicals [31, 40].
Lumen (L)Media
(M)
Normal
Eutrophic
remodelling
/_0173 M:L ratio
« CSAEndothelial dysfunction
Vascular remodelling
/_0173 M:L ratio
Vascular inflammation
Calcification
Arterial stiffness
Hypertrophic
remodelling
/_0173 M:L ratio
/_0173 CSA
Fig. 37.3 Illustration of the changes that occur during hypertension-associated vascular remodel-
ling: increased media-to-lumen ratio (M:L) and variable changes in cross-sectional area (CSA)37 Antihypertensive Drugs and Vascular Health592
Conclusive data on diuretics and diuretic-like agents on vascular health, particu-
larly regarding oxidative stress and endothelial function, are scant compared to 
other classes and heterogeneous across different agents. Nevertheless, they appear 
to exert a beneficial effect on arterial stiffness [62–65] and, ultimately, in protecting 
against target organ damage (heart, kidneys, brain). This is particularly evident in 
Calcium channel
blockersMineralocorticoid
receptor antagonists
Vascular
injuryVascular
healthACE Inhibitors /
Ang II receptor blockersDiuretics
No Smoking
Exercise ↓ Salt ↓ AlcoholHealthy diet
Fig. 37.4 Therapeutic approaches to promote vascular health: antihypertensive drugs and life-
style modifications can ameliorate vascular damage and reduce target organ damage and cardio-
vascular complications
Table 37.1 Antihypertensive drugs and beneficial vascular effects
Drug class Possible beneficial vascular effects
ACE inhibitors Vasodilation
Increased nitric oxide
Anti-inflammatory
Reduced reactive oxygen species
Angiotensin-II receptor blockers Vasodilation
Increased nitric oxide
Anti-inflammatory
Reduced reactive oxygen species
Calcium channel blockers Improved cellular redox state
Diuretics Reduced arterial stiffness
Anti-inflammatory/fibrotic (via natriuresis)
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists Anti-inflammatory
Anti-fibrotic
β-Blockers Increased nitric oxide
Reactive oxygen species scavenger
A. C. Cameron et al.593
salt-sensitive groups, such as blacks, elderly and patients with resistant hyperten-
sion, as endorsed by multiple guidelines [66, 67].
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRA) combine the beneficial effects of 
the diuretic class with downstream blockade of the RAAS system, which is an 
important mediator of vascular remodelling through promotion of vascular hyper -
trophy, fibrosis, inflammation and oxidative stress. Chronic blockade of mineralo-
corticoid receptors reduces cardiovascular fibrosis in both animal models and 
human studies of hypertension [1, 68].
Some examples of how these beneficial effects of the different drug classes trans-
lated into robust cardiovascular outcomes in clinical trials are provided below. The 
Telmisartan versus Ramipril in renal ENdothelial Dysfunction (TRENDY) study 
demonstrated improved endothelial function in a diabetic population with hyperten-
sion and early-stage nephropathy treated with telmisartan and ramipril [69, 70]. The 
Losartan Intervention For Endpoint Reduction in Hypertension (LIFE) study com-
pared losartan to atenolol-based therapy. Avoiding Cardiovascular Events through 
Combination Therapy in Patients Living with Systolic Hypertension 
(ACCOMPLISH) trial compared ACEI plus amlodipine versus ACEI plus a thiazide 
diuretic. As well as the Heart Outcomes Protection Evaluation (HOPE) study, these 
studies all showed superior clinical outcomes for treatment strategies with agents 
that improve endothelial function, such as RAAS blockers and CCBs [38, 71–74]. 
Overall, however, and at variance with β-blockers (atenolol) and α-blockers, diuret-
ics do not fall short in terms of robust endpoints, i.e. cardiovascular events: this was 
shown in ALLHAT (Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent 
Heart Attack Trial) [75] and recently reappraised by a systematic review and meta-
analysis [76]. This might reflect a higher efficacy observed in salt-sensitive indi-
viduals, the benefit on arterial stiffness and/or other mechanisms, related to sodium 
balance and its local accumulation in tissues. BP lowering agents which improve 
vascular health may achieve the best reductions in cardiovascular risk and targeting 
the adverse vascular changes that contribute to the development of hypertension 
should be a priority when developing new antihypertensives.
37.7  Antihypertensive Drugs and Vascular Health
37.7.1  ACE Inhibitors and Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers
ACEIs improve endothelial function in animal models and clinical studies of hyper -
tension [40], which may be due to direct vascular effects and to inhibition of brady-
kinin breakdown [31]. In clinical studies, ACEIs improve endothelial function as 
demonstrated by improved vascular responses to acetylcholine [31, 77–79] and 
improved FMD. This most likely relates to increased NO bioavailability and pre-
vention of Ang II-induced oxidative stress [31, 80–85]. Most studies of ACEIs dem-
onstrate greater lowering of central aortic than brachial artery BP [86, 87], which 
may relate to reduced oxidative stress and increased vasodilatation [86, 88]. ARBs 
may also have beneficial effects on endothelial function. The angiotensin type-1 37 Antihypertensive Drugs and Vascular Health594
(AT1) receptor antagonist losartan diminishes superoxide production, while block-
ade of AT1 receptors allows Ang II to bind to free angiotensin type-2 (AT2) recep-
tors and subsequently stimulate AT2-receptor induced NO synthesis and release. 
This may be one of the mechanisms through which ARBs can restore NO bioavail-
ability and improve endothelial function [31, 48, 89–91]. Losartan restores vasodi-
lator responses to acetylcholine [31, 92] and has beneficial effects on FMD similar 
to those observed with ramipril [31, 81]. While ACEIs and ARBs have comparable 
BP-dependent reductions in cardiovascular risk, ACEIs also have BP-independent 
effects that have not been observed with ARBs [93].
37.7.2  Calcium Channel Blockers
CCBs, particularly dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonists such as amlodip-
ine, improve endothelial function [40, 84, 94] by reducing intracellular Ca2+ concen-
tration and possibly through antioxidant effects [31, 86]. Nifedipine reduces 
ET-1-induced vasoconstriction, improves endothelium-dependent vasodilation [95] 
and increases coronary vascular responses to acetylcholine [31]. Amlodipine 
increases basal NO release, while lacidipine increases vasodilator responses to ace-
tylcholine and bradykinin [31, 96]. Endothelial cells do not express voltage-gated 
calcium channels and the improvements in endothelial function observed with 
CCBS are therefore unlikely to be calcium-dependent [31, 97]. Rather, CCBs appear 
to have antioxidant effects that may protect endothelial cells from oxygen free radi-
cals, thus improving NO bioavailability and endothelial function [31, 98, 99]. 
Elderly patients are more likely to have isolated systolic hypertension with increased 
pulse pressure and increased arterial stiffness. Dihydropyridine CCBs have a more 
pronounced effect on central than brachial BP [86, 100] and may be the most appro-
priate antihypertensive drugs in elderly patients.
37.7.3  Diuretics
Often regarded as “renal” drugs, acting mostly on the volume component of hyper -
tension, diuretic compounds were considered to have little or no effect on vascular 
health [63] and data with this regard are scant compared to other classes. Indeed, 
thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics (chlorthalidone, indapamide) appear as effective 
as CCBs and ARBs in reducing arterial stiffness and central pressure [62–64], 
although less than ACEIs [101] and MRAs [102]. Notably, the secondary increase 
in plasma aldosterone upon diuretic treatment might in part counteract the benefi-
cial effects of the drugs [103], thereby supporting the use of diuretics as part of a 
combination strategy with RAAS blockers [104]. It is also interesting to note that 
the novel and highly effective neprilysin inhibitor/valsartan combination acts by 
coupling a natriuretic and a RAAS-blocking effect [105].
Classic thiazide diuretics do not reduce oxidative stress or improve endothelial 
function [106] and this reflects in a lack of benefit on endothelial-dependent 
A. C. Cameron et al.595
vasodilation, compared to CCBs [107, 108]. However, a few reports suggest that 
indapamide has a vasodilatory activity mediated via free radical scavenging [109] 
and intrinsic Ca2+ antagonist effect [110]. Evidence, however, is much weaker than 
for other classes. Nevertheless, diuretics proved highly effective for prevention of 
cardiovascular events in the elderly [111] and, perhaps unsurprisingly, for preven-
tion of heart failure in the general hypertensive population [2, 112]. Intriguingly, 
current trends in the understanding of heart failure pathophysiology, particularly for 
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, point to (micro)vascular dysfunction 
as a primary culprit [113–116]. Whether diuretics or new drugs like sodium/glucose 
cotransporter 2 (SGLT2)-inhibitors [117] improve this microvascular dysfunction 
via modulation of (local) sodium balance, beyond an undisputable haemodynamic 
effect, is still a matter of speculation.
37.7.4  Mineralocorticoid Receptor Antagonists
Aldosterone exerts BP-elevating effects through interactions with the kidney that 
influence salt and water balance and may have additional direct effects on blood 
vessels [55, 118, 119]. Mineralocorticoid receptor activation may contribute to car -
diovascular dysfunction, inflammation and fibrosis [55]. Therefore, beyond their 
diuretic properties, MRAs such as spironolactone and eplerenone have beneficial 
BP-independent effects on endothelial function and can reduce arterial stiffness. 
This may reflect blockade of aldosterone’s pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic 
actions [86]. Spironolactone reduces PWV and augmentation index [120], while 
eplerenone reduces vascular stiffness, collagen/elastin ratio, pro-inflammatory 
mediators and systemic inflammatory markers in patients with hypertension. 
Because of all these addictive pleiotropic effects, it comes as no surprise that MRAs 
outperform other diuretics in improving arterial stiffness [102], FMD [121] or coro-
nary flow reserve [122]. MRAs, including the highly promising novel selective non-
steroidal finerenone 123, may therefore be an effective target to prevent vascular 
changes that occur in the development of hypertension, even out of the setting of 
resistant hypertension where MR antagonism was recently shown to be the strategy 
of choice [124].
37.7.5  β-Blockers
There is little evidence to suggest that β-blockers improve endothelial function. 
Atenolol may actually have a negative effect [31]. Nebivolol is a selective β 1-blocker 
which has vasodilator and NO donor properties that may improve endothelial func-
tion in patients with hypertension [31, 40, 125, 126]. Atenolol and nebivolol have 
similar reductions in brachial BP, while pulse pressure is significantly lower after 
nebivolol, suggesting nebivolol may have beneficial effects on arterial stiffness [86, 
127]. Overall, the potential beneficial vascular effects of nebivolol appear most 
likely related to enhanced release of endothelium-derived NO with associated 37 Antihypertensive Drugs and Vascular Health596
improvements in endothelial function and reduced arterial stiffness [86, 128]. 
Carvedilol is another selective β 1-blocker that has α1-adrenoceptor antagonistic 
properties as well as strong antioxidant effects that may improve endothelial func-
tion [31]. β-Blockers are less effective in improving endothelial function than RAAS 
blockers and CCBs [31].
37.8  Other Strategies to Improve Vascular Health 
in Hypertension
37.8.1  Smoking Cessation
Smoking acutely increases BP and can be associated with severe and malignant 
hypertension, although any chronic independent effects of smoking on BP appear 
small [129, 130]. However, smoking does contribute to the initiation and acceleration 
of vascular injury and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease through endothelial dys-
function, oxidative stress, reduced NO bioavailability, vascular inflammation, 
increased arterial stiffness and a shift towards a pro-thrombotic state [131, 132]. 
Furthermore, smoking reduces brachial artery FMD in a dose-dependent manner, as a 
result of reduced NO bioavailability [132, 133]. This is particularly relevant in smok-
ers who may be exposed to several periods of acute BP rises over the course of a day. 
Smoking exerts toxic effects on the endothelium which, combined with the adverse 
vascular effects of high BP, leads smoking and hypertension to have synergistic dele-
terious effects on vascular function and cardiovascular risk [129, 134]. Smoking ces-
sation is therefore essential to reduce overall cardiovascular risk [2 , 131, 135].
37.8.2  Exercise
Regular exercise can reduce BP [2, 135] and protect against arterial stiffness and 
endothelial dysfunction that occurs with advancing age [136]. Aerobic exercise 
reduces oxidative stress, inflammation and restores NO bioavailability [136]. 
Aerobic exercise improves forearm vascular responses to acetylcholine in older 
men [136, 137] that can be abolished by inhibition of eNOS, suggesting the benefits 
may be mediated by increased NO bioavailability [136, 138] Aerobic exercise also 
suppresses oxidative stress and may reduce vascular inflammation [136].
37.8.3  Diet and Weight Loss
Increased intake of fruit, vegetables and fish can reduce BP and improve endothe-
lium-dependent forearm blood flow responses in patients with hypertension [139, 
140]. This may be related to high polyphenol content in fruit and vegetables which 
can increase NO bioavailability [38, 139, 141, 142]. Increased consumption of fruit, 
vegetables and fish improves endothelial function, reduces BP and should be 
strongly encouraged [2, 135, 139].
A. C. Cameron et al.597
Reducing salt intake can reduce systolic BP by as much as 5 mmHg [143, 
144] and prevent hypertension [143, 145– 149]. These improvements may be 
related to improved endothelial function, since the hypertensive effect of salt 
loading is linked to oxidative stress and reduced NO bioavailability [17, 38, 
150– 152], and beneficial impact on large elastic artery compliance, particularly 
in salt-sensitive patients, e.g. the elderly [153]. While it is still debated which is 
the optimal range of sodium intake for cardiovascular health [154, 155], there is 
general agreement that cutting down high sodium consumption below 5 g/day is 
beneficial [156, 157].
There is a dose-dependent relationship between reduction in alcohol intake and 
reduced BP [143, 158]. Light alcohol consumption may confer some protection 
against ischaemic heart disease and alcohol consumption should therefore be lim-
ited to ≤ 3 units per day for men and ≤ 2 units per day for women, while patients 
with hypertension who drink excessively should be strongly encouraged to reduce 
their alcohol intake [2, 135]. Weight loss reduces BP and even modest reductions 
can prevent hypertension by approximately 20% in individuals who are prehyper -
tensive and overweight [143, 145].
37.9  Conclusions
Hypertension is characterised by vascular changes that include endothelial dysfunc-
tion, vasoconstriction, vascular remodelling, inflammation, fibrosis and arterial stiff-
ness. These vascular processes work synergistically with high BP to increase 
cardiovascular risk. Hypertension is a growing public health burden with increases 
the risk of target organ damage and cardiovascular disease. Despite many antihyper -
tensive drugs being available, optimal treatment remains a challenge. Antihypertensive 
drugs that promote vascular health, such as ACEIs, ARBs, CCBs, MRAs and, to 
some extent, diuretics, as well as newer cardiovascular drugs with natriuretic proper -
ties such as ARB-neprilysin inhibitors or SGLT2 inhibitors may positively influence 
vascular function. Lifestyle changes can also reduce the vascular effects of high BP 
and patients should be encouraged to reduce salt intake, exercise regularly, consume 
fish, fruit and vegetables, maintain a healthy weight, moderate their alcohol con-
sumption and not smoke. New blood pressuring lowering drugs should target the 
vascular changes associated with hypertension. Advancing our understanding of the 
vascular mechanisms that cause high BP will facilitate discovery of drugs to reduce 
the burden of hypertension.
37.10  Compliance with Ethical Standards
Funding: No external funding was used in the preparation of this chapter.
Conflict of interest: Alan C. Cameron, Giacomo Rossitto, Ninian N. Lang, and 
Rhian M. Touyz declare that they have no conflict of interest that might be relevant 
to the contents of this chapter. The authors are supported by grants from the British 
Heart Foundation (RE/13/530177; RG/13/7/30099 and CH/4/29762).37 Antihypertensive Drugs and Vascular Health598
References
 1. Harvey A, Montezano AC, Lopes RA, Rios F, Touyz RM. Vascular fibrosis in aging and hyper -
tension: molecular mechanisms and clinical implications. Can J Cardiol. 2016;32(5):659–68.
 2. Touyz RM, Dominiczak AF. Hypertension guidelines: is it time to reappraise blood pressure 
thresholds and targets? Hypertension. 2016;67(4):688–9.
 3. Taddei S, Virdis A, Ghiadoni L, Sudano I, Salvetti A. Effects of antihypertensive drugs on 
endothelial dysfunction: clinical implications. Drugs. 2002;62(2):265–84.
 4. Harvey A, Montezano AC, Touyz RM. Vascular biology of ageing—implications in hyper -
tension. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015;83(C):112–21.
 5. Lopes RA, Neves KB, Tostes RC, Montezano AC, Touyz RM. Downregulation of nuclear 
factor erythroid 2-related factor and associated antioxidant genes contributes to redox-sensi-
tive vascular dysfunction in hypertension. Hypertension. 2015;66(6):1240–50.
 6. AlGhatrif M, Strait JB, Morrell CH, et  al. Longitudinal trajectories of arterial stiffness 
and the role of blood pressure: the Baltimore longitudinal study of aging. Hypertension. 
2013;62(5):934–41.
 7. Lakatta EG, Levy D.  Arterial and cardiac aging: major shareholders in cardiovascu-
lar disease enterprises: part I: aging arteries: a “set up” for vascular disease. Circulation. 
2003;107(1):139–46.
 8. Lakatta EG. The reality of aging viewed from the arterial wall. Artery Res. 2013;7(2):73–80.
 9. Wind S, Beuerlein K, Armitage ME, et al. Oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction in 
aortas of aged spontaneously hypertensive rats by NOX1/2 is reversed by NADPH oxidase 
inhibition. Hypertension. 2010;56(3):490–7.
 10. Touyz RM, Briones AM, Sedeek M, Burger D, Montezano AC. NOX isoforms and reactive 
oxygen species in vascular health. Mol Interv. 2011;11(1):27–35.
 11. Montezano AC, Touyz RM. Molecular mechanisms of hypertension--reactive oxygen species 
and antioxidants: a basic science update for the clinician. Can J Cardiol. 2012;28(3):288–95.
 12. Montezano AC, Burger D, Ceravolo GS, Yusuf H, Montero M, Touyz RM. Novel Nox homo-
logues in the vasculature: focusing on Nox4 and Nox5. Clin Sci. 2011;120(4):131–41.
 13. Lee MY , Griendling KK.  Redox signaling, vascular function, and hypertension. Antioxid 
Redox Signal. 2008;10(6):1045–59.
 14. Weinberger MH, Miller JZ, Luft FC, Grim CE, Fineberg NS. Definitions and characteristics 
of sodium sensitivity and blood pressure resistance. Hypertension. 1986;8(6 Pt 2):II127–34.
 15. Dahl LK, Heine M, Tassinari L.  Role of genetic factors in susceptibility to experimental 
hypertension due to chronic excess salt ingestion. Nature. 1962;194:480–2.
 16. Elijovich F, Weinberger MH, Anderson CAM, et al. Salt sensitivity of blood pressure: a sci-
entific statement from the American Heart Association. Hypertension. 2016;68(3):e7–e46.
 17. Chen PY , Sanders PW. L-arginine abrogates salt-sensitive hypertension in dahl/Rapp rats. J 
Clin Investig. 1991;88(5):1559–67.
 18. Feng W, Ying W-Z, Aaron KJ, Sanders PW.  Transforming growth factor-β medi-
ates endothelial dysfunction in rats during high salt intake. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 
2015;309(12):F1018–25.
 19. Greaney JL, DuPont JJ, Lennon-Edwards SL, Sanders PW, Edwards DG, Farquhar 
WB. Dietary sodium loading impairs microvascular function independent of blood pressure 
in humans: role of oxidative stress. J Physiol Lond. 2012;590(21):5519–28.
 20. Nurkiewicz TR, Boegehold MA. High salt intake reduces endothelium-dependent dilation 
of mouse arterioles via superoxide anion generated from nitric oxide synthase. Am J Physiol 
Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2007;292(4):R1550–6.
 21. Raffai G, Durand MJ, Lombard JH. Acute and chronic angiotensin-(1-7) restores vasodila-
tion and reduces oxidative stress in mesenteric arteries of salt-fed rats. Am J Physiol Heart 
Circ Physiol. 2011;301(4):H1341–52.
 22. Gu JW, Anand V , Shek EW, et al. Sodium induces hypertrophy of cultured myocardial myo-
blasts and vascular smooth muscle cells. Hypertension. 1998;31(5):1083–7.
A. C. Cameron et al.599
 23. Machnik A, Neuhofer W, Jantsch J, et al. Macrophages regulate salt-dependent volume and 
blood pressure by a vascular endothelial growth factor-C-dependent buffering mechanism. 
Nat Med. 2009;15(5):545–52.
 24. Wiig H, Schröder A, Neuhofer W, et  al. Immune cells control skin lymphatic electrolyte 
homeostasis and blood pressure. J Clin Invest. 2013;123(7):2803–15.
 25. Kopp C, Linz P, Dahlmann A, et al. 23Na magnetic resonance imaging-determined tissue 
sodium in healthy subjects and hypertensive patients. Hypertension. 2013;61(3):635–40.
 26. Titze J, Luft FC. Speculations on salt and the genesis of arterial hypertension. Kidney Int. 
2017;91(6):1324–35.
 27. Laffer CL, Scott RC, Titze JM, Luft FC, Elijovich F. Hemodynamics and salt-and-water bal-
ance link sodium storage and vascular dysfunction in salt-sensitive subjects. Hypertension. 
2016;68(1):195–203.
 28. Oh YS, Appel LJ, Galis ZS, et al. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute working group 
report on salt in human health and sickness: building on the current scientific evidence. 
Hypertension. 2016;68(2):281–8.
 29. McMaster WG, Kirabo A, Madhur MS, Harrison DG. Inflammation, immunity, and hyper -
tensive end-organ damage. Circ Res. 2015;116(6):1022–33.
 30. Schiffrin EL.  Immune mechanisms in hypertension and vascular injury. Clin Sci. 
2014;126(4):267–74.
 31. Foss JD, Kirabo A, Harrison DG. Do high-salt microenvironments drive hypertensive inflam-
mation? Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2017;312(1):R1–4.
 32. Furchgott RF, Zawadzki JV . The obligatory role of endothelial cells in the relaxation of arte-
rial smooth muscle by acetylcholine. Nature. 1980;288(5789):373–6.
 33. Palmer RM, Ferrige AG, Moncada S. Nitric oxide release accounts for the biological activity 
of endothelium-derived relaxing factor. Nature. 1987;327(6122):524–6.
 34. Palmer RMJ, Ashton DS, Moncada S. Vascular endothelial cells synthesize nitric oxide from 
L-arginine. Nature. 1988;333(6174):664–6.
 35. Bredt DS, Hwang PM, Glatt CE, Lowenstein C, Reed RR, Snyder SH.  Cloned and 
expressed nitric oxide synthase structurally resembles cytochrome P-450 reductase. Nature. 
1991;351(6329):714–8.
 36. Yanagisawa M, Kurihara H, Kimura S, Goto K, Masaki T. A novel peptide vasoconstrictor, 
endothelin, is produced by vascular endothelium and modulates smooth muscle Ca2+ chan-
nels. J Hypertens Suppl. 1988;6(4):S188–91.
 37. Inoue A, Yanagisawa M, Kimura S, et al. The human endothelin family: three structurally and 
pharmacologically distinct isopeptides predicted by three separate genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A. 1989;86(8):2863–7.
 38. Dharmashankar K, Widlansky ME.  Vascular endothelial function and hypertension: 
insights and directions. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2010;12(6):448–55. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11906-010-0150-2.
 39. Hamburg NM, Benjamin EJ. Assessment of endothelial function using digital pulse ampli-
tude tonometry. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2009;19(1):6–11.
 40. Thuillez C, Richard V . Targeting endothelial dysfunction in hypertensive subjects. J Hum 
Hypertens. 2005;19:S21–5.
 41. Modena MG, Bonetti L, Coppi F, Bursi F, Rossi R. Prognostic role of reversible endothelial 
dysfunction in hypertensive postmenopausal women. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40(3):505–10.
 42. Benjamin EJ, Larson MG, Keyes MJ, et al. Clinical correlates and heritability of flow-medi-
ated dilation in the community: the Framingham heart study. Circulation. 2004;109(5):613–9.
 43. Widlansky ME, Gokce N, Keaney JF, Vita JA. The clinical implications of endothelial dys-
function. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42(7):1149–60.
 44. Rakova N, Kitada K, Lerchl K, et al. Increased salt consumption induces body water conser -
vation and decreases fluid intake. J Clin Invest. 2017;127(5):1932–43.
 45. Haynes WG, Webb DJ. Endothelin as a regulator of cardiovascular function in health and 
disease. J Hypertens. 1998;16(8):1081–98.
 46. Schiffrin EL. Role of Endothelin-1 in hypertension. Hypertension. 1999;34(4):876–81.37 Antihypertensive Drugs and Vascular Health600
 47. Griendling KK, Minieri CA, Ollerenshaw JD, Alexander RW.  Angiotensin II stimulates 
NADH and NADPH oxidase activity in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells. Circ Res. 
1994;74(6):1141–8.
 48. Rajagopalan S, Kurz S, Münzel T, et  al. Angiotensin II-mediated hypertension in the rat 
increases vascular superoxide production via membrane NADH/NADPH oxidase activation. 
Contribution to alterations of vasomotor tone. J Clin Investig. 1996;97(8):1916–23.
 49. Myung S-K, Ju W, Cho B, et al. Efficacy of vitamin and antioxidant supplements in preven-
tion of cardiovascular disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled 
trials. BMJ. 2013;346(jan18 1):f10.
 50. Radomski MW, Palmer RM, Moncada S. Endogenous nitric oxide inhibits human platelet 
adhesion to vascular endothelium. Lancet. 1987;2(8567):1057–8.
 51. Garg UC, Hassid A.  Nitric oxide-generating vasodilators and 8-bromo-cyclic guanosine 
monophosphate inhibit mitogenesis and proliferation of cultured rat vascular smooth muscle 
cells. J Clin Investig. 1989;83(5):1774–7.
 52. Kubes P, Suzuki M, Granger DN. Nitric oxide: an endogenous modulator of leukocyte adhe-
sion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991;88(11):4651–5.
 53. De Caterina R, Libby P, Peng HB, et al. Nitric oxide decreases cytokine-induced endothelial 
activation. Nitric oxide selectively reduces endothelial expression of adhesion molecules and 
proinflammatory cytokines. J Clin Investig. 1995;96(1):60–8.
 54. Schiffrin EL. Vascular remodeling in hypertension: mechanisms and treatment. Hypertension. 
2012;59(2):367–74.
 55. Savoia C, Sada L, Zezza L, et al. Vascular inflammation and endothelial dysfunction in exper -
imental hypertension. Int J Hypertens. 2011;2011(2 Suppl):1–8.
 56. Blake GJ, Ridker PM.  Novel clinical markers of vascular wall inflammation. Circ Res. 
2001;89(9):763–71.
 57. Sesso HD, Buring JE, Rifai N, Blake GJ, Gaziano JM, Ridker PM. C-reactive protein and the 
risk of developing hypertension. JAMA. 2003;290(22):2945–51.
 58. Preston RA, Ledford M, Materson BJ, Baltodano NM, Memon A, Alonso A. Effects of severe, 
uncontrolled hypertension on endothelial activation: soluble vascular cell adhesion mole-
cule-1, soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 and von Willebrand factor. J Hypertens. 
2002;20(5):871–7.
 59. Blake GJ, Rifai N, Buring JE, Ridker PM. Blood pressure, C-reactive protein, and risk of 
future cardiovascular events. Circulation. 2003;108(24):2993–9.
 60. Thorand B, Löwel H, Schneider A, et al. C-reactive protein as a predictor for incident dia-
betes mellitus among middle-aged men: results from the MONICA Augsburg cohort study, 
1984–1998. Arch Intern Med. 2003;163(1):93–9.
 61. Van Bortel LM, Laurent S, Boutouyrie P, et  al. Expert consensus document on the mea-
surement of aortic stiffness in daily practice using carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity. J 
Hypertens. 2012;30(3):445–8.
 62. Agnoletti D, Zhang Y , Borghi C, Blacher J, Safar ME.  Effects of antihypertensive drugs 
on central blood pressure in humans: a preliminary observation. Am J Hypertens. 
2013;26(8):1045–52.
 63. Mackenzie IS, McEniery CM, Dhakam Z, Brown MJ, Cockcroft JR, Wilkinson 
IB. Comparison of the effects of antihypertensive agents on central blood pressure and arte-
rial stiffness in isolated systolic hypertension. Hypertension. 2009;54(2):409–13.
 64. Alem M, Milia P, Muir S, Lees K, Walters M.  Comparison of the effects of diuretics on 
blood pressure and arterial stiffness in patients with stroke. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 
2008;17(6):373–7.
 65. Safar M, Laurent S, Safavian A, Pannier B, Asmar R. Sodium and large arteries in hyperten-
sion. Effects of indapamide. Am J Med. 1988;84(1B):15–9.
 66. Roush GC, Sica DA.  Diuretics for hypertension: a review and update. Am J Hypertens. 
2016;29(10):1130–7.
 67. Calhoun DA, Jones D, Textor S, et  al. Resistant hypertension: diagnosis, evaluation, and 
treatment. A scientific statement from the American Heart Association professional 
A. C. Cameron et al.601
education Committee of the Council for high blood pressure research. Hypertension. 
2008;51(6):1403–19.
 68. Savoia C, Touyz RM, Amiri F, Schiffrin EL. Selective mineralocorticoid receptor blocker 
eplerenone reduces resistance artery stiffness in hypertensive patients. Hypertension. 
2008;51(2):432–9.
 69. Ruilope LM, Redón J, Schmieder R. Cardiovascular risk reduction by reversing endothe-
lial dysfunction: ARBs, ACE inhibitors, or both? Expectations from the ONTARGET trial 
Programme. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2007;3(1):1–9.
 70. Schmieder RE, Delles C, Mimran A, Fauvel JP, Ruilope LM.  Impact of telmisartan ver -
sus ramipril on renal endothelial function in patients with hypertension and type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care. 2007;30(6):1351–6.
 71. Dahlöf B, Devereux RB, Kjeldsen SE, et al. Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in the 
losartan intervention for endpoint reduction in hypertension study (LIFE): a randomised trial 
against atenolol. Lancet. 2002;359(9311):995–1003.
 72. Jamerson K, Weber MA, Bakris GL, et al. Benazepril plus amlodipine or hydrochlorothiazide 
for hypertension in high-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(23):2417–28.
 73. Hadi HAR, Carr CS, Suwaidi AJ. Endothelial dysfunction: cardiovascular risk factors, ther -
apy, and outcome. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2005;1(3):183–98.
 74. Dagenais GR, Yusuf S, Bourassa MG, et  al. Effects of ramipril on coronary events in 
high-risk persons: results of the heart outcomes prevention evaluation study. Circulation. 
2001;104(5):522–6.
 75. ALLHAT Officers and Coordinators for the ALLHAT Collaborative Research Group. The 
antihypertensive and lipid-lowering treatment to prevent heart attack trial. Major outcomes 
in high-risk hypertensive patients randomized to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor 
or calcium channel blocker vs diuretic: the antihypertensive and lipid-lowering treatment to 
prevent heart attack trial (ALLHAT). JAMA. 2002;288(23):2981–97.
 76. Fretheim A, Odgaard-Jensen J, Brørs O, et al. Comparative effectiveness of antihypertensive 
medication for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: systematic review and multiple 
treatments meta-analysis. BMC Med. 2012;10:33.
 77. Schiffrin EL. Correction of remodeling and function of small arteries in human hyperten-
sion by cilazapril, an angiotensin I-converting enzyme inhibitor. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 
1996;27(Suppl 2):S13–8.
 78. Schiffrin EL, Deng LY . Comparison of effects of angiotensin I-converting enzyme inhibi-
tion and beta-blockade for 2 years on function of small arteries from hypertensive patients. 
Hypertension. 1995;25(4 Pt 2):699–703.
 79. Rizzoni D, Muiesan ML, Porteri E, et al. Effects of long-term antihypertensive treatment with 
lisinopril on resistance arteries in hypertensive patients with left ventricular hypertrophy. J 
Hypertens. 1997;15(2):197–204.
 80. Mancini GB, Henry GC, Macaya C, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition with 
quinapril improves endothelial vasomotor dysfunction in patients with coronary artery 
disease. The TREND (trial on reversing ENdothelial dysfunction) study. Circulation. 
1996;94(3):258–65.
 81. Hornig B, Landmesser U, Kohler C, et al. Comparative effect of ace inhibition and angioten-
sin II type 1 receptor antagonism on bioavailability of nitric oxide in patients with coronary 
artery disease: role of superoxide dismutase. Circulation. 2001;103(6):799–805.
 82. Antony I, Lerebours G, Nitenberg A.  Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition restores 
flow-dependent and cold pressor test-induced dilations in coronary arteries of hypertensive 
patients. Circulation. 1996;94(12):3115–22.
 83. Ghiadoni L, Virdis A, Magagna A, Taddei S, Salvetti A. Effect of the angiotensin II type 1 
receptor blocker candesartan on endothelial function in patients with essential hypertension. 
Hypertension. 2000;35(1 Pt 2):501–6.
 84. Taddei S, Virdis A, Ghiadoni L, Mattei P, Salvetti A. Effects of angiotensin converting enzyme 
inhibition on endothelium-dependent vasodilatation in essential hypertensive patients. J 
Hypertens. 1998;16(4):447–56.37 Antihypertensive Drugs and Vascular Health602
 85. Ghiadoni L, Magagna A, Versari D, et al. Different effect of antihypertensive drugs on con-
duit artery endothelial function. Hypertension. 2003;41(6):1281–6.
 86. Dudenbostel T, Glasser SP. Effects of antihypertensive drugs on arterial stiffness. Cardiol 
Rev. 2012;20(5):259–63.
 87. Protogerou AD, Stergiou GS, Vlachopoulos C, Blacher J, Achimastos A. The effect of anti-
hypertensive drugs on central blood pressure beyond peripheral blood pressure. Part II: evi-
dence for specific class-effects of antihypertensive drugs on pressure amplification. Curr 
Pharm Des. 2009;15(3):272–89.
 88. Hirata K, Vlachopoulos C, Adji A, O’Rourke MF.  Benefits from angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitor “beyond blood pressure lowering”: beyond blood pressure or beyond the 
brachial artery? J Hypertens. 2005;23(3):551–6.
 89. Wiemer G, Schölkens BA, Wagner A, Heitsch H, Linz W. The possible role of angiotensin 
II subtype AT2 receptors in endothelial cells and isolated ischemic rat hearts. J Hypertens 
Suppl. 1993;11(5):S234–5.
 90. Maeso R, Navarro-Cid J, Muñoz-García R, et al. Losartan reduces phenylephrine constrictor 
response in aortic rings from spontaneously hypertensive rats. Role of nitric oxide and angio-
tensin II type 2 receptors. Hypertension. 1996;28(6):967–72.
 91. Seyedi N, Xu X, Nasjletti A, Hintze TH. Coronary kinin generation mediates nitric oxide 
release after angiotensin receptor stimulation. Hypertension. 1995;26(1):164–70.
 92. Schiffrin EL, Park JB, Intengan HD, Touyz RM. Correction of arterial structure and endo-
thelial dysfunction in human essential hypertension by the angiotensin receptor antagonist 
losartan. Circulation. 2000;101(14):1653–9.
 93. Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists’ Collaboration, Turnbull F, Neal B, et al. Blood 
pressure-dependent and independent effects of agents that inhibit the renin-angiotensin sys-
tem. J Hypertens. 2007;25(5):951–8.
 94. Taddei S, Virdis A, Ghiadoni L, Uleri S, Magagna A, Salvetti A.  Lacidipine restores 
endothelium-dependent vasodilation in essential hypertensive patients. Hypertension. 
1997;30(6):1606–12.
 95. Sudano I, Virdis A, Taddei S, et al. Chronic treatment with long-acting Nifedipine reduces 
vasoconstriction to Endothelin-1 in essential hypertension. Hypertension. 2007;49(2):285–90.
 96. Lyons D, Webster J, Benjamin N. The effect of antihypertensive therapy on responsiveness 
to local intra-arterial NG-monomethyl-L-arginine in patients with essential hypertension. J 
Hypertens. 1994;12(9):1047–52.
 97. Himmel HM, Whorton AR, Strauss HC.  Intracellular calcium, currents, and stimulus-
response coupling in endothelial cells. Hypertension. 1993;21(1):112–27.
 98. Lupo E, Locher R, Weisser B, Vetter W. In vitro antioxidant activity of calcium antagonists 
against LDL oxidation compared with alpha-tocopherol. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 
1994;203(3):1803–8.
 99. Mak IT, Boehme P, Weglicki WB. Antioxidant effects of calcium channel blockers against 
free radical injury in endothelial cells. Correlation of protection with preservation of glutathi-
one levels. Circ Res. 1992;70(6):1099–103.
 100. Morgan T, Lauri J, Bertram D, Anderson A. Effect of different antihypertensive drug classes 
on central aortic pressure. Am J Hypertens. 2004;17(2):118–23.
 101. Jiang X-J, O'Rourke MF, Zhang Y-Q, He X-Y , Liu L-S. Superior effect of an angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitor over a diuretic for reducing aortic systolic pressure. J Hypertens. 
2007;25(5):1095–9.
 102. Ohta Y , Ishizuka A, Hayashi S, et  al. Effects of a selective aldosterone blocker and thia-
zide-type diuretic on blood pressure and organ damage in hypertensive patients. Clin Exp 
Hypertens. 2015;37(7):569–73.
 103. Matsui Y , Eguchi K, O'Rourke MF, Ishikawa J, Shimada K, Kario K. Association between 
aldosterone induced by antihypertensive medication and arterial stiffness reduction: the 
J-CORE study. Atherosclerosis. 2011;215(1):184–8.
 104. Joannides R, Bellien J, Thurlure C, Iacob M, Abeel M, Thuillez C. Fixed combination of per -
indopril and Indapamide at low dose improves endothelial function in essential hypertensive 
patients after acute administration. Am J Hypertens. 2008;21(6):679–84.
A. C. Cameron et al.603
 105. Chrysant SG. Pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and antihypertensive effects of the nepri-
lysin inhibitor LCZ-696: sacubitril/valsartan. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2017;11:461.
 106. Zhou M-S, Schulman IH, Jaimes EA, Raij L. Thiazide diuretics, endothelial function, and 
vascular oxidative stress. J Hypertens. 2008;26(3):494–500.
 107. Muiesan ML, Salvetti M, Monteduro C, et al. Effect of treatment on flow-dependent vasodila-
tion of the brachial artery in essential hypertension. Hypertension. 1999;33(1 Pt 2):575–80.
 108. Muiesan ML, Salvetti M, Belotti E, et al. Effects of barnidipine in comparison with hydro-
chlorothiazide on endothelial function, as assessed by flow mediated vasodilatation in hyper -
tensive patients. Blood Press. 2011;20(4):244–51.
 109. Vergely C, Walker MK, Zeller M, et al. Antioxidant properties of indapamide, 5-OH indap-
amide and hydrochlorothiazide evaluated by oxygen-radical absorbing capacity and electron 
paramagnetic resonance. Mol Cell Biochem. 1998;178(1–2):151–5.
 110. Calder JA, Schachter M, Sever PS.  Vasorelaxant actions of 5-OH-indapamide, a major 
metabolite of indapamide: comparison with indapamide, hydrochlorothiazide and cicleta-
nine. Eur J Pharmacol. 1994;256(2):185–91.
 111. Beckett NS, Peters R, Fletcher AE, et al. Treatment of hypertension in patients 80 years of 
age or older. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(18):1887–98.
 112. Burnier M, Narkiewicz K, Kjeldsen SE. Prevention of heart failure mortality and hospitaliza-
tions in SPRINT, EMPA-REG, ALLHAT and HYVET: are diuretics the clue? Blood Press. 
2017;26(4):193–4.
 113. Waddingham MT, Paulus WJ. Microvascular paradigm in heart failure with preserved ejec-
tion fraction: a quest for proof of concept. Circ Heart Fail. 2017;10(6):e004179.
 114. Paulus WJ, Tschöpe C. A novel paradigm for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: 
comorbidities drive myocardial dysfunction and remodeling through coronary microvascular 
endothelial inflammation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62(4):263–71.
 115. Mohammed SF, Hussain S, Mirzoyev SA, Edwards WD, Maleszewski JJ, Redfield 
MM. Coronary microvascular rarefaction and myocardial fibrosis in heart failure with pre-
served ejection fraction. Circulation. 2015;131(6):550–9.
 116. Hwang S-J, Melenovsky V , Borlaug BA.  Implications of coronary artery disease in heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63(25 Pt A):2817–27.
 117. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al. Empagliflozin, cardiovascular outcomes, and mortal-
ity in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(22):2117–28.
 118. Schiffrin EL. Effects of aldosterone on the vasculature. Hypertension. 2006;47(3):312–8.
 119. Williams GH. Cardiovascular benefits of aldosterone receptor antagonists: what about potas-
sium? Hypertension. 2005;46(2):265–6.
 120. de Souza F, Muxfeldt E, Fiszman R, Salles G. Efficacy of spironolactone therapy in patients 
with true resistant hypertension. Hypertension. 2010;55(1):147–52.
 121. Yamanari H, Nakamura K, Miura D, Yamanari S, Ohe T. Spironolactone and chlorthalidone 
in uncontrolled elderly hypertensive patients treated with calcium antagonists and angioten-
sin II receptor-blocker: effects on endothelial function, inflammation, and oxidative stress. 
Clin Exp Hypertens. 2009;31(7):585–94.
 122. Joffe HV , Kwong RY , Gerhard-Herman MD, Rice C, Feldman K, Adler GK.  Beneficial 
effects of eplerenone versus hydrochlorothiazide on coronary circulatory function in patients 
with diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92(7):2552–8.
 123. Bärfacker L, Kuhl A, Hillisch A, et al. Discovery of BAY 94-8862: a nonsteroidal antagonist 
of the mineralocorticoid receptor for the treatment of cardiorenal diseases. ChemMedChem. 
2012;7(8):1385–403.
 124. Williams B, MacDonald TM, Morant S, et al. Spironolactone versus placebo, bisoprolol, and 
doxazosin to determine the optimal treatment for drug-resistant hypertension (PATHWAY-2): 
a randomised, double-blind, crossover trial. Lancet. 2015;386(10008):2059–68.
 125. Cockcroft JR, Chowienczyk PJ, Brett SE, et al. Nebivolol vasodilates human forearm vas-
culature: evidence for an L-arginine/NO-dependent mechanism. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
1995;274(3):1067–71.
 126. Kubli S, Feihl F, Waeber B. Beta-blockade with nebivolol enhances the acetylcholine-induced 
cutaneous vasodilation. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2001;69(4):238–44.37 Antihypertensive Drugs and Vascular Health604
 127. Dhakam Z, Yasmin MECM, et al. A comparison of atenolol and nebivolol in isolated systolic 
hypertension. J Hypertens. 2008;26(2):351–6.
 128. Kampus P, Serg M, Kals J, et al. Differential effects of nebivolol and metoprolol on central 
aortic pressure and left ventricular wall thickness. Hypertension. 2011;57(6):1122–8.
 129. Primatesta P, Falaschetti E, Gupta S, Marmot MG, Poulter NR.  Association between 
smoking and blood pressure: evidence from the health survey for England. Hypertension. 
2001;37(2):187–93.
 130. Tuomilehto J, Elo J, Nissinen A. Smoking among patients with malignant hypertension. Br 
Med J (Clin Res Ed). 1982;284(6322):1086.
 131. Virdis A, Giannarelli C, Fritsch Neves M, Taddei S, Ghiadoni L.  Cigarette Smoking and 
Hypertension. Curr Pharm Des. 2010;16(23):2518–25.
 132. Messner B, Bernhard D. Smoking and cardiovascular disease: mechanisms of endothelial 
dysfunction and early atherogenesis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014;34(3):509–15.
 133. Celermajer DS, Sorensen KE, Gooch VM, et al. Non-invasive detection of endothelial dys-
function in children and adults at risk of atherosclerosis. Lancet. 1992;340(8828):1111–5.
 134. Kannel WB.  Importance of hypertension as a risk factor in cardiovascular disease. In:  
Hypertension: pathopsychology and treatment. New  York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 1977. 
p. 888–910.
 135. Williams B, Poulter NR, Brown MJ, et al. British hypertension society guidelines for hyper -
tension management 2004 (BHS-IV): summary. BMJ. 2004;328(7440):634–40.
 136. Santos-Parker JR, LaRocca TJ, Seals DR. Aerobic exercise and other healthy lifestyle factors 
that influence vascular aging. Adv Physiol Educ. 2014;38(4):296–307.
 137. DeSouza CA, Shapiro LF, Clevenger CM, et al. Regular aerobic exercise prevents and restores 
age-related declines in endothelium-dependent vasodilation in healthy men. Circulation. 
2000;102(12):1351–7.
 138. Taddei S, Galetta F, Virdis A, et al. Physical activity prevents age-related impairment in nitric 
oxide availability in elderly athletes. Circulation. 2000;101(25):2896–901.
 139. McCall DO, McGartland CP, McKinley MC, et al. Dietary intake of fruits and vegetables 
improves microvascular function in hypertensive subjects in a dose-dependent manner. 
Circulation. 2009;119(16):2153–60.
 140. Appel LJ, Moore TJ, Obarzanek E, et al. A clinical trial of the effects of dietary patterns on 
blood pressure. DASH collaborative research group. N Engl J Med. 1997;336(16):1117–24.
 141. Anter E, Thomas SR, Schulz E, Shapira OM, Vita JA, Keaney JF. Activation of endothelial 
nitric-oxide synthase by the p38 MAPK in response to black tea polyphenols. J Biol Chem. 
2004;279(45):46637–43.
 142. Widlansky ME, Duffy SJ, Hamburg NM, et al. Effects of black tea consumption on plasma 
catechins and markers of oxidative stress and inflammation in patients with coronary artery 
disease. Free Radic Biol Med. 2005;38(4):499–506.
 143. Appel LJ, Brands MW, Daniels SR, et al. Dietary approaches to prevent and treat hyper -
tension: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Hypertension. 
2006;47(2):296–308.
 144. He FJ, MacGregor GA. Effect of modest salt reduction on blood pressure: a meta-analysis of 
randomized trials. Implications for public health. J Hum Hypertens. 2002;16(11):761–70.
 145. The Trials of Hypertension Prevention Collaborative Research Group. Effects of weight loss 
and sodium reduction intervention on blood pressure and hypertension incidence in over -
weight people with high-normal blood pressure. The trials of hypertension prevention, phase 
II. Arch Intern Med. 1997;157(6):657–67.
 146. Langford HG, Blaufox MD, Oberman A, et al. Dietary therapy slows the return of hyperten-
sion after stopping prolonged medication. JAMA. 1985;253(5):657–64.
 147. Whelton PK, Appel LJ, Espeland MA, et  al. Sodium reduction and weight loss in the 
treatment of hypertension in older persons: a randomized controlled trial of nonpharma-
cologic interventions in the elderly (TONE). TONE collaborative research group. JAMA. 
1998;279(11):839–46.
A. C. Cameron et al.605
 148. Weir MR, Hall PS, Behrens MT, Flack JM. Salt and blood pressure responses to calcium 
antagonism in hypertensive patients. Hypertension. 1997;30(3 Pt 1):422–7.
 149. Appel LJ, Espeland MA, Easter L, Wilson AC, Folmar S, Lacy CR. Effects of reduced sodium 
intake on hypertension control in older individuals: results from the trial of nonpharmaco-
logic interventions in the elderly (TONE). Arch Intern Med. 2001;161(5):685–93.
 150. Kopkan L, Majid DSA. Superoxide contributes to development of salt sensitivity and hyper -
tension induced by nitric oxide deficiency. Hypertension. 2005;46(4):1026–31.
 151. Majid DSA, Kopkan L.  Nitric oxide and superoxide interactions in the kidney and their 
implication in the development of salt-sensitive hypertension. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 
2007;34(9):946–52.
 152. Kopkan L, Castillo A, Navar LG, Majid DSA.  Enhanced superoxide generation modu-
lates renal function in ANG II-induced hypertensive rats. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 
2006;290(1):F80–6.
 153. Gates PE, Tanaka H, Hiatt WR, Seals DR.  Dietary sodium restriction rapidly improves 
large elastic artery compliance in older adults with systolic hypertension. Hypertension. 
2004;44(1):35–41.
 154. Cogswell ME, Mugavero K, Bowman BA, Frieden TR. Dietary sodium and cardiovascular 
disease risk--measurement matters. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(6):580–6.
 155. O'Donnell M, Mente A, Yusuf S.  Sodium and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 
2014;371(22):2137–8.
 156. Mozaffarian D, Fahimi S, Singh GM, et al. Global sodium consumption and death from car -
diovascular causes. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(7):624–34.
 157. Mancia G, Oparil S, Whelton PK, et al. The technical report on sodium intake and cardiovas-
cular disease in low- and middle-income countries by the joint working group of the world 
heart federation, the European Society of Hypertension and the European public health asso-
ciation. Eur Heart J. 2017;38(10):712–9.
 158. Xin X, He J, Frontini MG, Ogden LG, Motsamai OI, Whelton PK. Effects of alcohol reduc-
tion on blood pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Hypertension. 
2001;38(5):1112–7.37 Antihypertensive Drugs and Vascular Health607 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_38
A. Olszanecka ( *) · D. Czarnecka 
First Department of Cardiology, Interventional Electrocardiology and Hypertension, 
Jagiellonian University Medical College, Cracow, Poland
e-mail: agnieszka.olszanecka@uj.edu.pl38Management of Prehypertension 
and Hypertension in Women 
of Childbearing Age
Agnieszka Olszanecka and Danuta Czarnecka
Cardiac disorders are the leading cause of deaths in women in developed countries 
[1, 2]. Hypertension is a major contributor to this mortality, potentially modifiable, 
but frequently undiagnosed or inadequately treated.
Gender-associated differences in the development of hypertension and cardiac 
diseases have been attributed to several factors, mainly the influence of estrogens on 
endothelial function. Although the exact mechanisms by which sex hormones influ-
ence the regulation of blood pressure are being investigated, there is increasing 
evidence that modulation of the activity of sympathetic nervous system and locally 
active hormones is of the major importance [3].
The gender differences in blood pressure appear during adolescence. Men have 
higher blood pressures compared with women at all ages. Hypertension is less com-
mon in women younger than 65 years of age, but after that higher percentage of 
women have hypertension compared with men. This difference in prevalence of 
hypertension in elderly will likely increase with continued aging of the female pop-
ulation [2]. The incidence of hypertension in women is also increasing in younger 
age groups, paralleling the epidemics of obesity. According to the data from National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey prevalence of hypertension increased 
between 1988 to 1994, 1999 to 2006, and 2007 to 2014 among non-Hispanic black 
males (37.5%, 39.5%, and 40.3%, respectively) and females (38.2%, 41.7%, and 
42.9%, respectively), non-Hispanic white males (25.6%, 28.7%, and 30.4%, respec-
tively) and females (22.9%, 27.8%, and 27.6%, respectively), and Mexican 
American females (25.0%, 26.1%, and 27.2%, respectively) [2]. In women in repro-
ductive age based on NHANES 1999–2008 hypertension was found in 7.7%, an 608
estimated 4.9% of women of reproductive age used antihypertensive medication 
[4]. Latest reports show that in women between 20 and 34 years of age the preva-
lence of hypertension is 8% compared to 11% in men in the same age category [2]. 
In women aged 35–44, hypertension is diagnosed in 23% (vs. 23% in men), and in 
women aged 45–54, hypertension is detected in 33% (vs. 36% in men) [2].
As blood pressure shows linear correlation with cardiovascular mortality and 
incidence of stroke and myocardial infarction, the categories of prehypertension [5] 
or “normal and high-normal” blood pressure were extracted (in opposition to “opti-
mal” blood pressure) [6] to identify subjects at higher risk of future cardiovascular 
events in whom some preventive strategies should be implemented.
Prevalence of prehypertension increased in last decades in both men and women 
[7]. The prevalence of prehypertension according to NHANES 1999–2000  in 
women and men by age group was 19.3% versus 44.7% (18–39 years) and 30.3% 
versus 38.7% (40–59 years) [7]. As compared with optimal blood pressure, high- 
normal blood pressure was associated with 2.5-fold increase of factor-adjusted haz-
ard ratio for cardiovascular disease among women (95% CI 1.6–4.1) compared to 
1.6 (95% CI 1.1–2.2) in men [8].
Although hypertension prevalence and absolute cardiovascular risk in young 
females is lower than in males and older women, this group of patients deserves 
special attention in terms of diagnostics and treatment. Relative risk of cardiovas-
cular mortality for any given increase in blood pressure is much more pronounced 
in younger individuals. Hypertension and prehypertension management in the 
population of young women should focus of several age and gender-specific 
aspects as both diagnostics and therapy are limited by childbearing potential. 
Understanding the epidemiology and pathophysiology of hypertension in female 
in reproductive age may help clinicians identify important modifiable risk factors, 
which in turn may improve pregnancy outcomes and prevent cardiovascular dis-
ease in the future.
38.1  Diagnostics
Diagnostic process in hypertensive or prehypertensive subjects aims to:
 1. Evaluate blood pressure values precisely, assess if the elevation in blood pressure 
is sustained
 2. Calculate global cardiovascular risk by:
 (a) Assessment of hypertension-induced target-organ damage (including sub-
clinical changes)
 (b) Assessment of classical cardiovascular risk factors
 3. Assess probability and introduce diagnostics for secondary hypertension
A thorough history and physical examination as well as laboratory assessment 
are needed to identify subclinical or overt accompanying disease.
A. Olszanecka and D. Czarnecka609
38.2  Patient’s History
In reviewing the history key questions should focus on identification risk factors 
such as unhealthy diet, sedentary lifestyle, smoking, alcohol consumption, being 
obese, or overweight. The family history of premature cardiovascular incidents as 
well as family history of hypertension, diabetes, and obesity should be obtained. 
The irregular menstruations suggesting polycystic ovaries syndrome or use of oral 
contraceptive pills are important as this information may influence future diagnostic 
or therapeutic decisions.
The information about the previous blood pressure values or duration of estab-
lished hypertensive disease, tolerance of medical treatment should be collected. The 
rare but characteristic for secondary hypertension symptoms should be identified—
rapid blood pressure elevations with sweating, headache and tachycardia (pheo-
chromocytoma), episodes of tetany, muscle weakness, polyuria (primary 
hyperaldosteronism), tachycardia, weight loss, anxiety (hyperthyroidism), irregular 
menstruations, polydypsia, polyuria, obesity (hypercortisolism), etc.
Gathering the data on concomitant chronic diseases may identify potential causes 
of blood pressure elevation or increase in total cardiovascular risk.
38.3  Physical Examination
38.3.1  Blood Pressure Measurement
Appropriate measurement and interpretation of the blood pressure value is essential 
in the diagnosis and management of hypertension. Technical issues include proper 
calibration of the validated device and appropriate cuff sizes-based setting. Despite 
the importance of office blood pressure measurement and its very widespread use, 
its value is compromised by phenomenon of blood pressure variability. Casual 
office readings are usually not sufficient to determine the status of an individual 
patient. To minimize the misdiagnosis—at least two readings should be taken at 
every visit, and as many as needed to obtain a stable level with less than a 5-mm Hg 
difference. During the first visit blood pressure should be measured on both arms. 
Moreover, at least two and, preferably, more sets of readings, weeks apart, should 
be taken unless the initial value is so high, e.g., greater than 180/120 mm Hg, indi-
cating that immediate therapy is needed.
Out-of-office blood pressure measurements can be alternative to office blood 
pressure measurements and should be recommended to establish diagnosis and 
exclude white-coat hypertension. Home blood pressure measurements (HBPM) and 
24 h ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) can facilitate more reliable and 
reproducible estimations of blood pressure. European Society of Cardiology [6] and 
NICE [9] guidelines recommend HBPM and/or ABPM in the initial diagnostics of 
subjects with mild hypertension. The choice between these two methods depends on 
availability, costs of use, and patient preference.38 Management of Prehypertension and Hypertension in Women610
As many as 32% of patients with hypertension diagnosed on the base of office 
blood pressure measurements have normal blood pressure at home or in ABPM, 
being reevaluated as “white-coat hypertensives” [10].
Women are more likely to have white-coat hypertension [11, 12], however 
this phenomenon is more pronounced in those older than 50 years and in preg-
nancy. Among predictors of white-coat hypertension, high perceived stress lev-
els in women was shown to be associated with white-coat hypertension more 
than in men [13]. Women may experience a different stress response to clinic 
visits than men, as evidenced by their blood pressure measurements, and this 
might explain the high percentage of women experiencing white-coat hyperten-
sion in previous research. This issue is of special importance in pregnant 
females, in whom out-of-office blood pressure can optimize therapeutic deci-
sions [14]. ABPM in pregnancy is the technique which best identifies hyperten-
sive pregnant women at increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes [14, 15]. 
White-coat hypertension has been considered as benign condition, however 
recent analysis of IDACO database of 8582 subjects followed for over 10.6 years 
showed that the prognosis in white-coat hypertension strongly depends on age 
and on baseline cardiometabolic risk [16]. In subjects older than 60 years and 
with three or more cardiovascular risk factors at baseline, there was signifi-
cantly more cardiovascular events during follow-up, than in normotensive indi-
viduals (adjusted hazard risk 2.19; 95% CI 1.09 to 4.37) [16]. In contrary, 
younger white-coat hypertensives with less than three cardiovascular risk fac-
tors exhibited similar cardiovascular morbidity/mortality as normotensive con-
trols. The results did not differ according to sex [16].
Masked hypertension is the situation of discrepancy between office blood pres-
sure measurements and ABPM, but with normal or high-normal blood pressure in 
the office and elevated blood pressure in ABPM. Masked hypertension—opposite to 
white-coat hypertension—more commonly affects men than women. The estimated 
frequency of masked hypertension in population-based trials was 13% [10]. The 
frequency of masked hypertension is higher if the office blood pressure remains in 
the categories of high-normal pressure. Masked hypertension is frequently associ-
ated with other cardiovascular risk factors and subclinical organ damage. The results 
of meta-analyses and prospective trials indicate that the risk of cardiovascular events 
is twofold higher in masked hypertensive patients than in true normotensives and is 
comparable to the risk of sustained hypertensives [10, 17, 18].
Except from proper blood pressure evaluation (including orthostatic blood pres-
sure change), the canon of physical examination of hypertensive patient includes 
cardiac auscultation (detection of murmurs of aortic stenosis, aortic coarctation, 
etc.), auscultation of carotid and renal arteries, examination of the lungs (assess-
ment of pulmonary congestion), abdominal palpation, examination of peripheral 
pulses, evaluation of peripheral edema, and measurement of ankle-brachial index. 
Attention should be paid to the presence of skin lesions (e.g., red striae in Cushing’s 
syndrome, neurofibromas in Recklinghausen disease) or hirsutism.
Anthropometric measurements with body weight, height and waist circumfer -
ence measurements are also included in the basics of physical examination.
A. Olszanecka and D. Czarnecka611
According to the current recommendations [6] the basic tests in the diagnosis of 
each patient with elevated blood pressure include:
• Blood morphology
• Fasting glucose
• Potassium concentration
• Total cholesterol, HDL (high-density lipoproteins), and LDL (low-density lipo-
proteins) and triglycerides
• Creatinine concentration and glomerular filtration estimate
• Concentration of uric acid
• General urine test
• Electrocardiogram
In most patients, carefully collected medical history, thoughtful physical exami-
nation, and the abovementioned additional tests allow the assessment of the meta-
bolic profile and the calculation of global cardiovascular risk, decide whether to 
initiate pharmacological treatment and, if necessary, suspect secondary 
hypertension.
38.4  Global Cardiovascular Risk
Conception of global cardiovascular risk evaluation in hypertensive or prehyperten-
sive subjects was evolving from assessing traditional risk factors (e.g., hypercholes-
terolemia, obesity, diabetes mellitus, smoking) towards an integrated, 
multidisciplinary clinical approach, aimed at determining the total cardiovascular 
risk profile in each individual patient for planning early and effective strategies for 
cardiovascular prevention.
Hypertension and prehypertension is very rarely isolated problem, in vast major -
ity it is associated with multiple risk factors and risk factor clustering is known to 
significantly increase the risk of cardiovascular mortality.
38.5  Female-Specific Cardiovascular Risk Factors
Gynecological and obstetric history including gestational hypertension, preeclamp-
sia, gestational diabetes mellitus, preterm births, or birth of an infant small for ges-
tational age is known to double the risk of future cardiovascular events [19, 20].
Recently in large prospective cohort study involving 116,430 women, the asso-
ciation between laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis and risk of hypertension 
was found [21]. Compared with women without endometriosis, relative risk for 
hypertension in endometriosis was 1.16 (95% CI 1.11–1.20) and for hypercholes-
terolemia 1.31 (95% CI 1.27–1.36). RRs for both hypercholesterolemia and hyper -
tension were highest among women younger than 40 and decreased as age increased. 
Association between endometriosis and hypertension could be partly accounted for 38 Management of Prehypertension and Hypertension in Women612
by hysterectomy/oophorectomy at earlier age, increased use of non-steroidal inflam-
matory drugs and hormonal therapy.
Among patients with systemic autoimmune diseases 78% are women [22]. 
Systemic autoimmune disorders including lupus erythematosus, psoriasis and pso-
riatic arthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis are associated with increased risk of coro-
nary heart disease, independent of traditional risk factors [23]. In the report of 
Manzi and coworkers, women with systemic lupus erythematosus had a 5–6-fold 
increased risk of cardiovascular disease, while women aged 35–44 years were over 
50 times more likely to have a myocardial infarction than were women of similar 
age in the Framingham Offspring Study [24].
Chronic inflammation, endothelial dysfunction and steroid therapy influencing 
blood pressure values and metabolic profile may partly explain cardiovascular bur -
den in systemic diseases. It should be noted, however, that both hypertension and 
diabetes are more prevalent in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus com-
pared to healthy age-matched controls [25].
Cigarette smoking in women is related with 25% higher risk of coronary heart 
disease compared with men [26]. From the practical point of view, health care pro-
fessionals should strongly promote smoking cessation in all individuals, with spe-
cial attention paid to female in childbearing age. Smoking during preconception and 
all stages of pregnancy increases the risk of low birth weights in infants (adjusted 
odds ratio 1.75, 95% CI 1.2–2.56) [27] and correlates with the risk of preterm deliv-
ery [28]. Women over 35 who smoke should be advised not to use oral contracep-
tives because of significant increase of thrombotic risk.
Epidemiological trials clearly show that the correlation exists between body 
weight and blood pressure in normal weight subjects and in overweight and obesity 
[29]. The associations of body weight with prehypertension and hypertension are 
stronger in women than in men [30]. According to NHANES trial, obesity was iden-
tified as the most significant modifiable risk factor for hypertension and prehyper -
tension in women in reproductive age [4]. Obesity is not only related with the 
development of hypertension, but independently of blood pressure, increases the 
risk of subclinical organ damage like left ventricular hypertrophy and microalbu-
minuria [31]. Obese patients are at higher risk of stroke, coronary artery disease, 
congestive heart failure, cardiac arrhythmias (including atrial fibrillation), and sud-
den death [32, 33].
Obesity is a major component of the metabolic syndrome, a complex of interre-
lated risk factors for cardiovascular disease and diabetes, that arises from insulin 
resistance accompanying abnormal adipose tissue deposition and function. Although 
controversy exists regarding its pathogenesis and the appropriateness of considering 
it a distinct state, prospective observations indicate that metabolic syndrome has 
been reported to be a strong predictor of cardiovascular events, and cardiovascular 
risk in patients with metabolic syndrome is increased beyond the risk attributable to 
BMI [34]. Metabolic syndrome in women carries higher risk of coronary events 
than in men [35]. However, recent analyses found that this difference is mediated 
mainly by the role of overt diabetes in female, which triples the cardiovascular risk 
in women (while doubling it in men) [36].
A. Olszanecka and D. Czarnecka613
Visceral adipose tissue is considered not only as energy storage, but is emerging 
as active endocrine organ secreting a number of hormone-like compounds termed 
adipokines, regulating many physiological processes. Visceral adipose tissue seems 
to link obesity with hypertension, diabetes, and atherosclerosis [37]. Leptin is an 
adipose tissue-derived hormone, which acts in the hypothalamus and regulates 
energy metabolism by decreasing appetite and increasing energy expenditure via 
sympathetic nerve activity in thermogenic and nonthermogenic tissues. In the rodent 
models of obesity, leptin loses its ability to suppress appetite but retains its sympa-
thetic stimulation activity [38]. Leptin level was found to be higher in women than 
men at each level of BMI [39].
These observations underline the importance of the adipose tissue distribution 
rather than overall obesity as a key factor in predicting cardiovascular risk in women. 
Although body mass index and waist circumference have a high degree of collinear -
ity, it should be noted that there is substantial heterogeneity of metabolic abnormali-
ties in obese patients. From the point of view of everyday clinical practice a number 
of subjects have increased waist circumference being still in the group of normal or 
slightly increased BMI category. With this perspective waist circumference should 
become a routine measurement in the assessment of cardiovascular risk.
Abdominal visceral fat is associated with increased sympathetic overactivity that 
results in an increase in renin production, angiotensin 2 and aldosterone production, 
increased inflammatory mediators, oxidative stress, and decreased endothelial vaso-
dilatation [40]. Sympathetic overactivity is one of the most important mechanisms—
linking obesity to hypertension and hypertensive target-organ damage [41, 42].
38.6  Subclinical Organ Damage
The continuum of progression from elevated blood pressure towards clinically overt 
cardiovascular disease involves initially asymptomatic alterations in cardiac, vascu-
lar and renal function and structure. Detailed assessment of potential target-organ 
damage is of special importance in mild hypertensives and prehypertensive 
subjects.
Structural hypertension-induced changes in the heart are detectable even in chil-
dren, adolescents, and young adults [43, 44]. Subanalysis of the Strong Heart Study 
cohort including 1940 participants younger than 40 years (mean age 26.8 ± 7.7 years; 
57.5% of women) revealed that the prevalence of left ventricular hypertrophy was 
threefold higher in hypertensives and twofold higher in prehypertensives compared 
to their normotensive counterparts.
It has been documented that left ventricular hypertrophy predicts progression 
from prehypertension to hypertension independently of baseline blood pressure [45]. 
Echocardiographically determined left ventricular hypertrophy was diagnosed in 
17% of 625 untreated prehypertensive participants of the Strong Heart Study [45]. 
The authors found that during 4 years of follow-up, 38% prehypertensives progressed 
to sustained arterial hypertension. Left ventricular mass and the presence of diabetes 
were the most important predictors of progression to hypertension.38 Management of Prehypertension and Hypertension in Women614
It is of note that hypertensive women exhibit a greater prevalence of left ventricu-
lar hypertrophy than men for a similar degree of BP elevation [46–48]. Moreover, 
left ventricular hypertrophy is differently affecting prognosis in men and women, 
producing higher risk of coronary events [47] and stroke [49] in women. The mech-
anism by which LVH produces higher risk in women remains uncertain. Available 
data revealed that the changes in left ventricular mass in response to age and hyper -
trophic stimuli are different in men and women [50]. Women more often than men 
develop left ventricular concentric remodeling and have higher relative wall thick-
ness. This pattern of left ventricular geometry contributes to imbalance between 
oxygen supply and oxygen demand in myocardial tissue, making women more sus-
ceptible to myocardial blood flow disturbances and ischemia [51].
Vascular changes in hypertension and prehypertension include increase in pulse 
wave velocity and structural changes in the vascular wall like increase in intima- 
media thickness (IMT) or presence of atherosclerotic plaques.
Prehypertension is associated with both increase in arterial stiffness assessed by 
measurement of pulse wave velocity and increase in carotid artery IMT [44].
In women age-related arterial stiffening was higher compared with men [52]. 
Increased arterial stiffness was associated with development of hypertension emer -
gencies in pregnancy. Carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity was shown to be signifi-
cantly higher in women who had history of preeclampsia than women with 
normotensive pregnancies [53]. Although it is unclear whether arterial stiffness is 
involved in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia or is only a marker of increased risk, 
assessment of arterial stiffness may be useful in predicting hypertensive emergen-
cies in pregnancy and predict future cardiovascular complications in women with 
history of gestational hypertension.
Subclinical atherosclerosis defined as thickening of IMT or presence of athero-
sclerotic plaques was found in 63% participants of PESA (Progression of Early 
Subclinical Atherosclerosis) Trial [54]. In this large, asymptomatic middle-aged 
cohort (n = 4570; mean age 45.8 years) subclinical atherosclerosis was found more 
commonly in men than women (71 vs. 48%). Results of the other study proved that 
exposure to prehypertension before age 35 shows significant association with coro-
nary calcium later in life [55], suggesting that young adulthood is a critical period 
in life when exposure to suboptimal blood pressure is particularly important.
Microalbuminuria—marker of subclinical renal damage—is a direct result of 
glomerular capillary permeability. Microalbuminuria correlates with future cardio-
vascular risk. In prehypertensives prevalence of microalbuminuria is higher than in 
normotensive population, even after exclusion of diabetic patients [56, 57].
Urine analysis in pregnancy is obligatory and detection of microalbuminuria 
may have prognostic value in prediction of adverse pregnancy outcome including 
preeclampsia and preterm delivery [58].
Retinopathy. Retinal microcirculation offers an opportunity to directly study the 
effects of hypertension on small vessels. Eye fundus examination is a primary study 
in patients with hypertensive urgencies and emergencies. In middle-aged subjects 
early changes in fundoscopy do not have prognostic significance being indistin-
guishable from age-related vascular thickening [59]. However in young patients, 
A. Olszanecka and D. Czarnecka615
retinal arterioles narrowing and arteriovenous nicking indicate for chronic elevation 
of blood pressure and eye fundus examination may provide useful clues and facili-
tate decisions about implementation of antihypertensive treatment.
38.7  Secondary Hypertension
The prevalence of secondary hypertension and the most common etiologies vary by 
age group and gender. In young adults, particularly women, renal artery stenosis 
caused by fibromuscular dysplasia is one of the most important reasons of second-
ary hypertension.
Renal parenchymal diseases are dominant cause of hypertension in children and 
adolescents, with equal prevalence in both sexes. Coarctation of the aorta is second 
cause of hypertension in childhood, more common in men, but it affects up to 12% 
of women with Turner syndrome, which is 400 times higher than in general popula-
tion [60]. The prevalence of primary hyperaldosteronism in young population is 
comparable in men and women [61], however it has to be remembered that diagnos-
tic value of aldosterone-to-renin ratio may be compromised in women by the influ-
ence of estrogen and progesterone concentration changing in menstrual cycle, 
pregnancy, and during oral contraceptive use.
The most common endocrinopathy in female in reproductive age is polycystic 
ovaries syndrome (PCOS). PCOS is characterized by oligomenorrhea/amenorrhea, 
hyperandrogenaemia and polycystic ovaries and in the pathophysiology alterations 
in the secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone, defect in androgen synthesis 
and development of insulin resistance are underlined [62]. Insulin resistance, obe-
sity, and metabolic syndrome coexisting with PCOS explain predisposition for arte-
rial hypertension in these subjects [63]. In large community-based trial including 
11,035 women with PCOS the risk of hypertension was 40% higher in PCOS com-
pared to regularly menstruating controls (OR 1.41; 95% CI 1.31–1.51) [64]. Data on 
the influence of PCOS on long-term cardiovascular mortality and morbidity are not 
clear, and despite the increased prevalence of classical risk factors such as hyperten-
sion, diabetes, and dyslipidemia the prospective studies with hard endpoints failed 
to identify PCOS as a separate risk phenotype [65].
Hyper- and hypothyroidism may contribute to blood pressure changes due to the 
influence of thyroid hormones on vascular resistance and cardiac output. In women 
hyperthyroidism has more pronounced influence of cardiac performance [66], thus 
screening diagnostics of thyroid function is advised in this population.
Rare cause of secondary hypertension in young women is pheochromocytoma. 
As a significant contributor to maternal morbidity and mortality in pregnancy, pher -
chromocytoma should be excluded in women in childbearing age, if characteristic 
symptoms occur.
Separate issue in young females is drug-induced hypertension, among which oral 
contraceptive pill (OCP) use is the most important reason of blood pressure eleva-
tion. Pregnancy-induced hypertensive disorders will be discussed later in this 
article.38 Management of Prehypertension and Hypertension in Women616
38.8  Fibromuscular Dysplasia
Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is rare arterial pathology, defined as non- 
inflammatory non-atherosclerotic vascular disease, presenting anatomically in three 
different types, including “medial,” “intimal,” and “adventitial” fibroplasia. FMD 
affects to small and medium-sized arteries and leads to narrowing of arteries, which 
also become prone for dissections.
The exact prevalence of FMD in the general population and detailed etiology is 
not known. Disease predominantly affects young and middle-aged women. In the 
American registry of 447 patients with FMD, 91% were women in mean age 
51.9 ± 13.4 years [67].
Dysplastic changes can be located in almost all arterial territories, but the most 
commonly FMD affects renal arteries (60–70% of patients, in 35% changes are 
located bilaterally) [68].
Narrowing of renal artery leads to renovascular hypertension, being the most 
common manifestation of the disease.
Second common localization of dysplastic arterial changes are carotid arteries 
(25–30%). Most subjects are asymptomatic, but both transient ischemic attacks and 
stroke incidents may be related with FMD.  Carotid dysplastic changes may be 
accompanied by cerebral aneurysms, thus imaging of central nervous system vascu-
lature is important in these patients.
New onset of arterial hypertension in young female and vascular bruit in epigas-
tric area should raise the suspicion of FMD. FMD should also be considered in 
subjects with severe hypertension and headaches in the absence of obesity, use of 
contraceptives, and history of parenchymal renal disease.
Although catheter-based angiography remains the gold standard in the diagnos-
tics of patients with FMD, initially noninvasive test should be performed—renal 
duplex scan, carotid ultrasound, computed tomography scans, and magnetic reso-
nance imaging. Thoughtful early diagnostics is of special importance, as early treat-
ment (percutaneous renal angioplasty with stent implantation) may lead to 
normalization or improvement in blood pressure control in majority of patients.
38.9  Oral Contraceptives
The use of oral contraceptives may be associated with an increase in blood pres-
sure. Typically, the increase in blood pressure during oral contraception is low, 
but even 5% of women taking oral hormonal contraceptives may develop hyper -
tension, especially after prolonged use [69, 70]. However, it has to be taken into 
account that abovementioned data are derived from studies that used contracep-
tion with significantly higher doses of both estradiol and progestogens then next 
generations pills. Currently used contraceptive pills contain lower doses of ethy-
nylestradiol (20–25  μg) and lower doses of more selective progestogens (<1 mg). 
This has reduced the incidence of hypertension in second and third generation 
oral contraceptives users, although blood pressure in women using OCP is still 
A. Olszanecka and D. Czarnecka617
higher than nonusers, even if blood pressure is in the normal range [71]. The 
primary mechanism of blood pressure elevation during use of OCP is thought to 
be increased hepatic synthesis of angiotensinogen, and subsequent salt and water 
retention.
Data on the effect of progestogens on blood pressure are ambiguous, the effect 
on blood pressure is rather small. Thus, according to some authors, a single com-
pound containing only progestogen may be an alternative to a two-component con-
traceptive pill in women with a higher cardiovascular risk. In the longitudinal 
observation of over one million women, the use of progestin-only pills was not 
related to increase of the risk of thrombotic stroke and myocardial infarction [72]. 
Drospirenon is a synthetic progestogen, chemically related to spironolacton and 
possessing antimineralocorticoid properties, what might oppose the influence of 
estrogens on blood pressure. OCP based on combination of ethynylestradiol and 
drospirenon is not changing blood pressure, however in one, small prospective 
study the increase of heart rate was documented [73].
In most patients who develop hypertension during oral contraceptives, it is 
benign and resolves to 6 months after discontinuation of hormonal treatment.
Women with mild hypertension who use oral contraceptives may be offered: 
discontinuation of therapy and home self-monitoring, and reevaluation after few 
months (verification if hypertension is essential or drug-induced). The second 
method (especially if such are preferences of the patient) is the introduction of 
antihypertensive therapy (primarily diuretics) and continuation of oral contra-
ceptives provided that blood pressure is controlled and patient has low total car -
diovascular risk. In women with high cardiovascular risk and poor control of 
pressure, antihypertensive treatment and withdrawal of hormonal contraceptives 
are necessary.
38.10  Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy
Hypertensive disorders during pregnancy are significant concerns, they complicate 
7–15% of all pregnancies and are one of the major causes of maternal and fetal 
mortality in developed countries [74]. Diagnosis of hypertension during pregnancy 
is based on absolute blood pressure values>140/90  mmHg recorded during two 
independent measurements at an interval of at least 6 h or when, even in a single 
measurement, blood pressure is >170/110 mmHg.
The classification of hypertension in pregnancy distinguishes the following 
categories:
• Preexisting hypertension (chronic hypertension—present before pregnancy or 
developing before the 20th week of pregnancy)
• Gestational hypertension, i.e., pregnancy-induced hypertension (develops after 
20 weeks of gestation)
• Preeclampsia, i.e., gestational hypertension with proteinuria (>300  mg/L or 
500 mg/24 h), eclampsia is diagnosed when seizures have occurred38 Management of Prehypertension and Hypertension in Women618
• Preexisting hypertension with superimposing proteinuria (preeclampsia super -
imposing on chronic hypertension)
• Unclassified hypertension (diagnosed after 20 weeks of pregnancy, if previous 
pressure values are unknown)
It should be emphasized that preeclampsia and chronic hypertension in preg-
nancy should be considered as two different clinical entities.
Preeclampsia is a systemic disorder with generalized vascular endothelial mal-
function, initialized by abnormal early trophoblastic implantation (insufficient 
migration to the persistent muscle structure of the central spiral artery). Thus, it can 
be divided into two stages: fetal stage—abnormal placental flow and maternal—
systemic response with activation of inflammatory reaction, oxidative stress, and 
systemic endothelial dysfunction. Pathological changes in the course of this syn-
drome are therefore mainly ischemic and occur in the placenta, kidney, liver, and 
brain.
Chronic hypertension in pregnancy increases the risk of preeclampsia (which is 
17–25% higher than in the general population), but in majority of patients the prog-
nosis and pregnancy outcome are good. The problem of chronic hypertension in 
pregnancy is growing, with the current tendency to postpone motherhood decisions 
for a later life of a woman. Current statistics indicate that chronic hypertension is 
present in 1–5% of pregnant women (it is predicted that the incidence of obesity 
may increase due to the increasing obesity problem) [75].
The primary goal of treating pregnant women is to prevent maternal and fetal 
complications and carefully weigh the benefits of maternal treatment (risk of car -
diovascular events) and the risk of its use to the fetus (teratogenic effects, placental 
hypoperfusion). It is important to realize that there are not many data on the safety 
of antihypertensive drugs in pregnancy.
Benefits of antihypertensive treatment were unquestionable only in patients with 
a pregnancy pressure of more than 160/110 mmHg, and they primarily concern the 
reduction of the risk of cerebrovascular complications in the mother, with no benefit 
from antihypertensive treatment for fetal development. In mild to moderate hyper -
tension results of antihypertensive treatment are not clear. Meta-analysis of 49 trials 
comparing treatment versus no treatment on maternal and fetus outcome in mild and 
moderate pregnant hypertensives revealed that treatment did not result in either fetal 
benefit or harm [76]. Treatment also did not significantly reduce perinatal mortality 
or frequency of prematurity, preeclampsia, or abruptio placentae, but reduced the 
incidence of severe hypertension.
According to American guidelines blood pressure lowering treatment is required 
if blood pressure in pregnancy is >160/110 mmHg [77] and even>170/110 mmHg 
[78]. According to the ESC recommendations, pharmacological treatment may be 
introduced when the patient’s pressure exceeds 140/90  mmHg in patients with 
hypertension in the presence of subclinical organ damage or coexisting diabetes or 
renal disease, and in uncomplicated hypertension when the blood pressure is above 
150/95 mmHg [6, 79].
A. Olszanecka and D. Czarnecka619
Despite the lack of data on blood pressure targets, most experts recommend that 
blood pressure should be maintained at 130–150/80–100 mmHg during antihyper -
tensive treatment in pregnancy. The results of the CHIPS study (Control of 
Hypertension in pregnancy Study) provided that less-tight control of maternal 
hypertension (target diastolic blood pressure 100 mmHg) compared with tight con-
trol (target diastolic blood pressure 85 mmHg) resulted in no significant difference 
in the risk of perinatal outcomes, however tight control reduced the risk of severe 
hypertension [80].
The pharmacological options for effective antihypertensive treatment in preg-
nancy with acceptable safety profile in pregnancy include: methyldopa (250–500 mg 
po bid-qid, max 2 g/d), labetalol (100–400 mg po bid-tid, max 1200 mg/d), and 
nifedipine (slow-acting preparations, 20–60 mg po OD, max 120 mg/d) [6, 78, 81].
As during first semester of pregnancy physiological blood pressure reduction is 
observed, women with chronic hypertension who are normotensive or mildly hyper -
tensive on medication may be considered to stop medication during early preg-
nancy, or continue medication with pregnancy-dedicated antihypertensive drugs, 
with close monitoring of the maternal blood pressure response. Due to high fre-
quency of white-coat hypertension, ABPM use is recommended to estimate blood 
pressure values and guide therapy in pregnancy.
Recent report of the National Birth Defects Prevention Study revealed that early 
hypertensive treatment in pregnancy was associated with increased risk of fetal con-
genital heart diseases (aortic coarctation, pulmonary valve stenosis, Ebstein malfor -
mation, atrial septum defect 2, perimembranous ventricular septal defect) [82]. 
Nevertheless, except for Ebstein malformation, both untreated hypertension and 
late hypertension treatment were also associated with significantly increased risk of 
the same defects. The study had limited power to analyze the risk related to separate 
drug classes, but while methyldopa caused only modest increase in risk of congeni-
tal malformations, beta-blockers (including labetalol) use was significantly increas-
ing the risk of congenital heart defects, similarly like renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system blockade. This observation rises some controversies and requires verifica-
tion of the labetalol safety in pregnancy.
In each case, persistent blood pressure increase in a pregnant woman over 
170/110 mmHg should be considered as urgency, requiring hospitalization and pos-
sibly extended diagnostics. The worsening of blood pressure control in chronic 
hypertension in pregnancy may indicate superimposing preeclampsia. The diagno-
sis can be challenging, as one or more factors used to diagnosed preeclampsia are 
already present in these subjects.
The definite treatment of preeclampsia is termination of pregnancy. Lowering 
blood pressure does not affect the course of preeclampsia, but should be imple-
mented and optimized to prevent the maternal risk of vascular complications (stroke, 
acute heart failure, aortic dissection, etc.).
Emergent therapy for acute, severe blood pressure elevations in pregnancy 
includes—parenteral labetalol (starting from 20 mg intravenously over 2 min, with 
possible re-administration of the drug with doubling the dose in 10 min intervals, to 38 Management of Prehypertension and Hypertension in Women620
cumulative dose 220 mg), hydralazine (starting from 5–10 mg intravenously over 
2 min, with possible re-administration of the drug in 10 min intervals and increase 
of the dose to 20 mg, to cumulative dose 25 mg per h), and oral nifedipine (10 mg 
capsule, with possible re-administration of 20  mg tablet). In case of pulmonary 
edema iv nitroglicerine (5–10  μg/min) is recommended [81]. With abovementioned 
drug regimens in most patients blood pressure control can be achieved. Options for 
second-line therapy include labetalol or nicardipine by infusion pump. Sodium 
nitroprusside (0.25–5.0  μg/kg/min) is administered as a last resort with careful 
monitoring and avoidance of cyanide toxicity.
Current guidelines recommend the administration of low dose of aspirin from 
12 weeks of pregnancy until the delivery in prevention of preeclampsia in women at 
high risk (history of preeclampsia, especially in accompanied by adverse outcome, 
multifetal gestation, chronic hypertension, type 1 or 2 diabetes, autoimmune disease 
such as systemic lupus erythematosus, or antiphospholipid syndrome, chronic kidney 
disease) [6 , 81]. Aspirin might be considered in women with more than one moderate 
risk factor for preeclampsia (first pregnancy, age > 40 years, pregnancy interval of 
>10 years, BMI >35 kg/m2 at first visit, family history of preeclampsia and multiple 
pregnancy), provided that they are at low risk of gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
Hypertensive mothers should not be discouraged from breastfeeding. Drugs 
which have no known adverse effects on babies receiving breast milk and appear to 
be safe during lactation are—labetalol, nifedipine, enalapril, captopril, and meto-
prolol [75].
38.11  Treatment of Prehypertension and Hypertension
38.11.1  Non-pharmacological Interventions in Hypertension 
and Prehypertension
Non-pharmacological treatment is necessary at every stage of hypertension and in 
all subjects defined as prehypertensives.
Its basic principles include diet, weight reduction, reduced salt intake, regular 
physical activity, reduced alcohol consumption, and smoking cessation. There was 
no clearly different effect of diet on the pressure in men and women; however, there 
was a trend towards greater reduction in systolic pressure in women using the DASH 
diet than in men [83].
The alcohol threshold for women is lower than for men, so women are not 
advised to consume more than 10–20  g of ethanol per day. Physical activity in 
women is associated not only with a significant reduction in blood pressure, but also 
with improved weight control, improved metabolic profile, and better quality of life.
Incorporation of lifestyle interventions and their persistent adherence is difficult 
to achieve in everyday practice. Multicomponent behavioral interventions were 
proven to reduce cardiovascular risk and cardiovascular morbidity [84, 85] and their 
implementation as a part of routine medical care may have a substantial impact on 
public health.
A. Olszanecka and D. Czarnecka621
38.11.2  Pharmacological Treatment of Hypertension
Although current guidelines for management of hypertension do not differentiate 
gender-based therapeutic approaches, pathophysiological differences in female 
hypertension should be considered in clinical decisions and taken into account in 
individualization of therapy.
In young people, according to the NICE guidelines [9], the first choice drug 
should be angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor antago-
nists, since hypertension often coexists with metabolic disorders and activation of 
sympathetic nervous system. Despite their obvious advantages, these drugs are not 
a preferred group for the pharmacotherapy of women of childbearing potential.
An alternative for women of childbearing potential, are calcium antagonists, thia-
zide-like diuretic, and in those with coexisting tachycardia and hyperkinetic circula-
tion features—beta-blockers. Drugs in this group are not preferred in monotherapy for 
uncomplicated hypertension due to potential adverse effects on metabolic parameters 
such as insulin sensitivity or lipid profile. However, newer generations beta-adreno-
lytic, such as bisoprolol, nebivolol, or carvedilol, have more favorable profile.
Calcium antagonists are a metabolically neutral group of drugs, which are 
approved for use in pregnancy and therefore their use in women of childbearing 
potential is safe and may be a separate group of indications. The use of calcium 
antagonists is limited by the side effects—peripheral edema and facial flush, which 
are experienced in women twice as common as in men [86].
Diuretics are effective drugs but, as with beta-blockers, their use is limited by 
their metabolic profile, especially with high doses of thiazide. Diuretics are a valu-
able supplement to combination therapy, are the most commonly used second drug 
in combination therapy, and undoubtedly should be an indispensable part of triple 
therapy. Diuretic monotherapy, on the other hand, can also be considered in case of 
hypertension in young women in the course of oral contraception.
Pharmacological treatment of prehypertension has been investigated in several 
clinical trials. The prevention of prehypertension to hypertension was tested with 
the use of candesartan [87], ramipril [88], and low-dose chlortalidon-amilorid com-
bination [89]. In all abovementioned studies, pharmacological intervention was 
associated with a significant reduction of developing hypertension. However, differ -
ences in the occurrence of cardiovascular events were not detected.
Based on the lack of long-term, prospective, randomized trials proving reduction in 
cardiovascular mortality and morbidity, current guidelines do not recommend imple-
mentation of pharmacotherapy in prehypertensive patients. However, detailed cardio-
vascular risk assessment should be performed in each individual with prehypertension, 
to exclude masked hypertension and to guide the decision of treatment schedule.
Early identification and treatment of cardiovascular risk factors in women is very 
important. Although women experience cardiovascular complications at an older 
age and at a lower rate than do men and absolute risk is lower in women than in 
men, the proportion of preventable cardiovascular complication is from 30 to 100% 
higher in women than in men. The lower absolute risk in women should therefore 
not be considered an excuse for therapeutic laxity [90].38 Management of Prehypertension and Hypertension in Women622
References
 1. Gholizadeh L, Davidson P. More similarities than differences: an international comparison of 
CVD mortality and risk factors in women. Health Care Women Int. 2008;29:3–22.
 2. Benjami E, Blaha M, Chiuve S, Cushman M, Das S, Deo R, et  al. Heart disease and 
stroke statistics  – 2017 update a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2017;135(10):e146–603.
 3. dos Santos R, da Silva F, Ribeiro RJ, Stefanon I. Sex hormones in the cardiovascular system. 
Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2014;18(2):89–103.
 4. Bateman BT, Shaw KM, Kuklina EV , Callaghan WM, Seely EW, Herna S.  Hypertension 
in women of reproductive age in the United States: NHANES 1999–2008. PLoS One. 
2012;7(4):e36171.
 5. Chobanian A, Bakris G, Black H, Cushman W, Green L, Izzo JJ, et al. The seventh report of 
the joint National Committee on prevention, detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood 
pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA J Am Med Assoc. 2003;289(19):2560–72.
 6. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redon J, Zanchetti A, Böhm M, et al. 2013 ESH/ESC 
guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension: the task force for the management 
of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2013;34(28):2159–219.
 7. Qureshi AI, Suri MFK, Kirmani JF, Divani AA. Prevalence and trends of prehypertension and 
hypertension in United States: National Health and nutrition examination surveys 1976 to 
2000. Med Sci Monit. 2005;11(9):CR403–9. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16127357; 
http://www.medscimonit.com/fulltxt.php?IDMAN=5896.
 8. Conen D, Ridker PM, Buring JE, Glynn RJ. Risk of cardiovascular events among women with 
high normal blood pressure or blood pressure progression: prospective cohort study. BMJ. 
2007;335(7617):432. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=1962877&t
ool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.
 9. McManus RJ, Caulfield M, Williams B. NICE hypertension guideline 2011: evidence based 
evolution. BMJ. 2012;344(jan13 1):e181. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.e181.
 10. Fagard RH, Cornelissen V A.  Incidence of cardiovascular events in white-coat, masked 
and sustained hypertension versus true normotension: a meta-analysis. J Hypertens. 
2007;25(11):2193–8. http://content.wkhealth.com/linkback/openurl?sid=WKPTLP:landingp
age&an=00004872-200711000-00002.
 11. Dolan E, Stanton A, Atkins N, Den Hond E, Thijs L, McCormack P, et al. Determinants of 
white-coat hypertension. Blood Press Monit. 2004;9(6):307–9. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18927542.
 12. James G, Marion R, Pickering T.  White-coat hypertension and sex. Blood Press Monit. 
1998;3(5):281–7. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10212367.
 13. Cobos B, Haskard-Zolnierek K, Howard K. White coat hypertension: improving the patient- 
health care practitioner relationship. Psychol Res Behav Manag. 2015;8:133–41. http://www.
pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=4427265&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstr
act.
 14. Brown MA, Mangos G, Davis G, Homer C. The natural history of white coat hypertension 
during pregnancy. BJOG. 2005;112(5):601–6.
 15. Hermida RC, Ayala DE. Prognostic value of office and ambulatory blood pressure measure-
ments in pregnancy. Hypertension. 2002;40(3):298–303.
 16. Franklin SS, Thijs L, Asayama K, Li Y , Hansen TW, Boggia J, et al. The cardiovascular risk of 
white-coat hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68(19):2033–43.
 17. Pierdomenico SD, Cuccurullo F.  Prognostic value of white-coat and masked hypertension 
diagnosed by ambulatory monitoring in initially untreated subjects: an updated meta analysis. 
Am J Hypertens. 2011;24(1):52–8. https://academic.oup.com/ajh/article-lookup/doi/10.1038/
ajh.2010.203.
A. Olszanecka and D. Czarnecka623
 18. Hänninen M-RA, Niiranen TJ, Puukka PJ, Johansson J, Jula AM.  Prognostic signifi-
cance of masked and white-coat hypertension in the general population. J Hypertens. 
2012;30(4):705–12. http://content.wkhealth.com/linkback/openurl?sid=WKPTLP:landingpa
ge&an=00004872-201204000-00016.
 19. Bellamy L, Casas J-P, Hingorani AD, Williams DJ. Pre-eclampsia and risk of cardiovascular dis-
ease and cancer in later life: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2007;335(7627):974. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17975258; http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articler -
ender.fcgi?artid=PMC2072042.
 20. Hermes W, Tamsma JT, Grootendorst DC, Franx A, van der Post J, van Pampus MG, et al. 
Cardiovascular risk estimation in women with a history of hypertensive pregnancy disorders 
at term: a longitudinal follow-up study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2013;13(1):126. http://
bmcpregnancychildbirth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2393-13-126.
 21. Mu F, Rich-Edwards J, Rimm EB, Spiegelman D, Forman JP, Missmer SA. Association between 
endometriosis and hypercholesterolemia or hypertension. Hypertension. 2017;70(1):59–65.
 22. Fairweather D, Frisancho-Kiss S, Rose NR. Sex differences in autoimmune disease from a 
pathological perspective. Am J Pathol. 2008;173(3):600–9. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0002944010616355.
 23. Al Husain A, Bruce IN. Risk factors for coronary heart disease in connective tissue diseases. 
Ther Adv Musculoskelet Dis. 2010;2(3):145–53. http://tab.sagepub.com/cgi/doi/10.1177/175
9720X10365301.
 24. Manzi S, Meilahn E, Rairie J, Conte C, Medsger TJ, Jansen-McWilliams L, et al. Age-specific 
incidence rates of myocardial infarction and angina in women with systemic lupus erythema-
tosus: comparison with the Framingham study. Am J Epidemiol. 1997;145(5):408–4015.
 25. Bruce IN, Urowitz MB, Gladman DD, Ibanez D, Steiner G. Risk factors for coronary heart 
disease in women with systemic lupus erythematosus: the Toronto risk factor study. Arthritis 
Rheum. 2003;48(11):3159–67.
 26. Huxley RR, Woodward M. Cigarette smoking as a risk factor for coronary heart disease in 
women compared with men: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort stud-
ies. Lancet. 2011;378(9799):1297–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60781-2.
 27. Jaddoe VWV , Troe E-JWM, Hofman A, Mackenbach JP, Moll HA, Steegers EAP, et al. Active 
and passive maternal smoking during pregnancy and the risks of low birthweight and pre-
term birth: the generation R study. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 2008;22(2):162–71. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1365-3016.2007.00916.x.
 28. Ko T-J, Tsai L-Y , Chu L-C, Yeh S-J, Leung C, Chen C-Y , et al. Parental smoking during preg-
nancy and its association with low birth weight, small for gestational age, and preterm birth 
offspring: a birth cohort study. Pediatr Neonatol. 2014;55(1):20–7.
 29. Dyer AR, Elliott P. The INTERSALT Study: relations of body mass index to blood pressure. 
INTERSALT co-operative research group. J Hum Hypertens. 1989;3(5):299–308. http://euro-
pepmc.org/abstract/MED/2810326.
 30. Wakabayashi I.  Stronger associations of obesity with prehypertension and hypertension in 
young women than in young men. J Hypertens. 2012;30(7):1423–9. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/22573123.
 31. Poirier P, Giles TD, Bray GA, Hong Y , Stern JS, Pi-Sunyer FX, et al. Obesity and cardiovas-
cular disease. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006;26(5):968 LP–976. http://atvb.ahajournals.
org/content/26/5/968.abstract.
 32. Hubert HB, Feinleib M, McNamara PM, Castelli WP. Obesity as an independent risk factor 
for cardiovascular disease: a 26- year follow-up of participants in the Framingham heart study. 
Circulation. 1983;67(5):968–77. http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/doi/10.1161/01.CIR.67.5.968.
 33. Romero-Corral A, Montori VM, Somers VK, Korinek J, Thomas RJ, Allison TG, et  al. 
Association of bodyweight with total mortality and with cardiovascular events in coro-
nary artery disease: a systematic review of cohort studies 5. Lancet. 2006;368(1474–547X 
(Electronic)):666–78.38 Management of Prehypertension and Hypertension in Women624
 34. Kip KE, Marroquin OC, Kelley DE, Johnson BD, Kelsey SF, Shaw LJ, et al. Clinical impor -
tance of obesity versus the metabolic syndrome in cardiovascular risk in women: a report from 
the Women’s ischemia syndrome evaluation (WISE) study. Circulation. 2004;109(6):706–13.
 35. Hunt KJ, Resendez RG, Williams K, Haffner SM, Stern MP. National Cholesterol Education 
Program versus World Health Organization metabolic syndrome in relation to all-cause and 
cardiovascular mortality in the San Antonio heart study. Circulation. 2004;110(10):1251–7.
 36. Peters SAE, Huxley RR, Woodward M. Diabetes as risk factor for incident coronary heart 
disease in women compared with men: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 64 cohorts 
including 858,507 individuals and 28,203 coronary events. Diabetologia. 2014;57(8):1542–51.
 37. Redón J, Cea-Calvo L, Moreno B, Monereo S, Gil-Guillén V , Lozano JV , et al. Independent 
impact of obesity and fat distribution in hypertension prevalence and control in the elderly. J 
Hypertens. 2008;26(9):1757–64.
 38. Wang B, Chandrasekera PC, Pippin JJ. Leptin- and leptin receptor-deficient rodent models: 
relevance for human type 2 diabetes. Curr Diabetes Rev. 2014;10(2):131–45. http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24809394; http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.
fcgi?artid=PMC4082168.
 39. Ma D, Feitosa MF, Wilk JB, Laramie JM, Yu K, Leiendecker-Foster C, et al. Leptin is asso-
ciated with blood pressure and hypertension in women from the National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute family heart study. Hypertension. 2009;53(3):473–9.
 40. Esler M, Straznicky N, Eikelis N, Masuo K, Lambert G, Lambert E. Mechanisms of sympa-
thetic activation in obesity-related hypertension. Hypertension. 2006;48(5):787–96.
 41. Lambert E, Straznicky N, Eikelis N, Esler M, Dawood T, Masuo K, et al. Gender differences 
in sympathetic nervous activity: influence of body mass and blood pressure. J Hypertens. 
2007;25(7):1411–9. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17563563.
 42. Lambert E, Sari CI, Dawood T, Nguyen J, McGrane M, Eikelis N, et al. Sympathetic nervous 
system activity is associated with obesity-induced subclinical organ damage in young adults. 
Hypertension. 2010;56(3):351–8.
 43. Daniels SR, Loggie JM, Khoury P, Kimball TR.  Left ventricular geometry and severe left 
ventricular hypertrophy in children and adolescents with essential hypertension. Circulation. 
1998;97(19):1907–11.
 44. Urbina EM, Khoury PR, Mccoy C, Daniels SR, Kimball TR, Dolan LM. Cardiac and vascular 
consequences of pre-hypertension in youth. J Clin Hypertens. 2011;13(5):332–42.
 45. De Marco M, De Simone G, Roman MJ, Chinali M, Lee ET, Russell M, et al. Cardiovascular 
and metabolic predictors of progression of prehypertension into hypertension: the strong heart 
study. Hypertension. 2009;54(5):974–80.
 46. Okin PM, Gerdts E, Kjeldsen SE, Julius S, Edelman JM, Dahlöf B, et al. Gender differences 
in regression of electrocardiographic left ventricular hypertrophy during antihypertensive ther -
apy. Hypertension. 2008;52(1):100–6.
 47. Porthan K, Niiranen TJ, Varis J, Kantola I, Karanko H, Kähönen M, et al. ECG left ventricular 
hypertrophy is a stronger risk factor for incident cardiovascular events in women than in men 
in the general population. J Hypertens. 2015;33(6):1284–90. http://content.wkhealth.com/
linkback/openurl?sid=WKPTLP:landingpage&an=00004872-201506000-00024.
 48. Liebson PR, Grandits G, Prineas R, Dianzumba S, Flack JM, Cutler JA, et al. Echocardiographic 
correlates of left ventricular structure among 844 mildly hypertensive men and women in the 
treatment of mild hypertension study (TOMHS). Circulation. 1993;87(2):476–86. http://circ.
ahajournals.org/content/87/2/476.abstract.
 49. Antikainen RL, Grodzicki T, Palmer AJ, Beevers DG, Webster J, Bulpitt CJ. Left ventricu-
lar hypertrophy determined by Sokolow–Lyon criteria: a different predictor in women than 
in men? J Hum Hypertens. 2006;20(6):451–9. http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/
sj.jhh.1002006.
 50. Hayward CS, Webb CM, Collins P.  Effect of sex hormones on cardiac mass. Lancet. 
2001;357(9265):1354–6.
 51. Truong Q, Toepker M, Mahabadi A, Bamberg F, Rogers I, Blankstein R, et al. Relation of left 
ventricular mass and concentric remodeling to extent of coronary artery disease by computed 
A. Olszanecka and D. Czarnecka625
tomography in patients without left ventricular hypertrophy: ROMICAT study. J Hypertens. 
2010;27(12):2472–82.
 52. Redfield MM, Jacobsen SJ, Borlaug BA, Rodeheffer RJ, Kass DA. Age- and gender-related 
ventricular-vascular stiffening: a community-based study. Circulation. 2005;112(15):2254–62.
 53. Hausvater A, Giannone T, Sandoval Y-HG, Doonan RJ, Antonopoulos CN, Matsoukis 
IL, et  al. The association between preeclampsia and arterial stiffness. J Hypertens. 
2012;30(1):17–33. http://content.wkhealth.com/linkback/openurl?sid=WKPTLP:landingpag
e&an=00004872-201201000-00003.
 54. Fernández-Friera L, Peñalvo JL, Fernández-Ortiz A, Ibañez B, López-Melgar B, Laclaustra M, 
et al. Prevalence, vascular distribution, and multiterritorial extent of subclinical atherosclerosis 
in a middle-aged cohort the PESA (progression of early subclinical atherosclerosis) study. 
Circulation. 2015;131(24):2104–13.
 55. Pletcher MJ, Bibbins-Domingo K, Lewis CE, Wei GS, Sidney S, Carr JJ, et al. Prehypertension 
during young adulthood and coronary calcium later in life. Ann Intern Med. 2008;149(2):91–9.
 56. Tenekecioglu E, Yilmaz M, Yontar OC, Karaagac K, Agca FV , Tutuncu A, et  al. 
Microalbuminuria in untreated prehypertension and hypertension without diabetes. Int J Clin 
Exp Med. 2014;7(10):3420–9.
 57. Lee JE, Kim YG, Choi YH, Huh W, Kim DJ, Oh HY .  Serum uric acid is associated with 
microalbuminuria in prehypertension. Hypertension. 2006;47(5):962–7. http://graphics.
tx.ovid.com/ovftpdfs/FPDDNCDCKFHCAH00/fs046/ovft/live/gv023/00004268/00004268-
200605000-00027.pdf.
 58. Jayaballa M, Sood S, Alahakoon I, Padmanabhan S, Cheung NW, Lee V . Microalbuminuria 
is a predictor of adverse pregnancy outcomes including preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens. 
2015;5(4):303–7.
 59. Cuspidi C, Meani S, Salerno M, Fusi V , Severgnini B, Valerio C, et  al. Retinal microvas-
cular changes and target organ damage in untreated essential hypertensives. J Hypertens. 
2004;22(11):2095–102. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15480092.
 60. Wong S, Burgess T, Cheung M, Zacharin M. The prevalence of turner syndrome in girls pre-
senting with coarctation of the aorta. J Pediatr. 2014;164(2):259–63.
 61. Noilhan C, Barigou M, Bieler L, Amar J, Chamontin B, Bouhanick B.  Causes of second-
ary hypertension in the young population: a monocentric study. Ann Cardiol Angeiol. 
2016;65(3):159–64.
 62. Wang H-S, Wang T-H. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), insulin resistance and insulin-like 
growth factors (IGfs)/IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs). Chang Gung Med J. 2003;26(8):540–53.
 63. Bentley-Lewis R, Seely E, Dunaif A.  Ovarian hypertension: polycystic ovary syndrome. 
Endorinol Metab Clin North Am. 2011;40(2):433–49. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/
articlerender.fcgi?artid=2867586&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.
 64. Lo JC, Feigenbaum SL, Yang J, Pressman AR, Selby JV , Go AS. Epidemiology and adverse 
cardiovascular risk profile of diagnosed polycystic ovary syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2006;91(4):1357–63. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16434451.
 65. Wild S, Pierpoint T, McKeigue P, Jacobs H.  Cardiovascular disease in women with poly-
cystic ovary syndrome at long-term follow-up: a retrospective cohort study. Clin Endocrinol. 
2000;52(5):595–600.
 66. Pearce EN, Yang Q, Benjamin EJ, Aragam J, Vasan RS. Thyroid function and left ventricular 
structure and function in the Framingham heart study. Thyroid. 2010;20(4):369–73. http://
www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=2867586&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype
=abstract.
 67. Olin JW, Froehlich J, Gu X, Michael Bacharach J, Eagle K, Gray BH, et  al. The United 
States registry for fibromuscular dysplasia: results in the first 447 patients. Circulation. 
2012;125(25):3182–90.
 68. Persu A, Giavarini A, Touzé E, Januszewicz A, Sapoval M, Azizi M, et al. European con-
sensus on the diagnosis and management of fibromuscular dysplasia. J Hypertens. 
2014;32(7):1367–78. http://content.wkhealth.com/linkback/openurl?sid=WKPTLP:landingp
age&an=00004872-201407000-00003.38 Management of Prehypertension and Hypertension in Women626
 69. Dong W, Colhoun HM, Poulter NR.  Blood pressure in women using oral contraceptives: 
results from the health survey for England 1994. J Hypertens. 1997;15(10):1063–8. http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9350579.
 70. Chasan-Taber L, Willett W, Manson J, Spiegelman D, Hunter D, Curhan G, et al. Prospective 
study of oral contraceptives and hypertension among women in the United States [Internet]. 
Circulation. 1996;94:483–9. http://ovidsp.ovid.com/ovidweb.cgi?T=JS&PAGE=reference&D
=emed7&NEWS=N&AN=26266136.
 71. Williamson PM, Buddle ML, Brown MA, Whitworth JA. Ambulatory blood pressure moni-
toring (ABPM) in the normal menstrual cycle and in women using oral contraceptives. 
Comparison with conventional blood pressure measurement. Am J Hypertens. 1996;9(10 Pt 
1):953–8.
 72. Lidegaard Ø, Løkkegaard E, Jensen A, Skovlund CW, Keiding N. Thrombotic stroke and myo-
cardial infarction with hormonal contraception. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(24):2257–66. http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22693997.
 73. Cagnacci A, Ferrari S, Napolitano A, Piacenti I, Arangino S, V olpe A. Combined oral contra-
ceptive containing drospirenone does not modify 24-h ambulatory blood pressure but increases 
heart rate in healthy young women: prospective study. Contraception. 2013;88(3):413–7.
 74. Magee LA, V on Dadelszen P, Chan S, Gafni A, Gruslin A, Helewa M, et al. The control of 
hypertension in pregnancy study pilot trial. BJOG. 2007;114(6):770.
 75. Visintin C, Mugglestone MA, Almerie MQ, Nherera LM, James D, Walkinshaw 
S.  Management of hypertensive disorders during pregnancy: summary of NICE guidance. 
BMJ. 2010;341(September):c2207.
 76. Abalos E, Duley L, Steyn D.  Antihypertensive drug therapy for mild to moderate hyper -
tension during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;2:CD002252. https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858. PREG.
 77. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Task Force on Hypertension in 
Pregnancy. Hypertension in pregnancy. Report of the American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists’ Task Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 2013;122(5):1122–
31. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24150027, http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0733865112000562%5Cnhttp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24150027.
 78. Magee LA, Bc V , Helewa M, Mb W, Rey E, Qc M, et al., Sogc Clinical Practice Guideline. 
Diagnosis, evaluation, and management of the hypertensive disorders of pregnancy: executive 
summary. J Obstet Gynaecol Can. 2014;36(5):416–38.
 79. Regitz-Zagrosek V , Blomstrom Lundqvist C, Borghi C, Cifkova R, Ferreira R, Foidart JM, 
et al. ESC Guidelines on the management of cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy. Eur 
Heart J. 2011;32(24):3147–97.
 80. Magee LA, V on Dadelszen P, Rey E, Ross S, Asztalos E, Murphy KE, et al. Less-tight versus 
tight control of hypertension in pregnancy. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(24):2367–8.
 81. Committee on Obstetric Practice. Emergent therapy for acute-onset, severe hypertension dur -
ing pregnancy and the postpartum period. Obstet Gynecol. 2013;122(5):1122–31.
 82. Fisher S, Van Zutphen A, Werler M, Lin A, Romitti P, Druschel C, et al. Maternal antihyper -
tensive medication use and congenital heart defects. Updated results from the National Birth 
Defects Prevention Study. Hypertension. 2017;69(5):798–805.
 83. Harrington JM, Fitzgerald AP, Kearney PM, McCarthy VJC, Madden J, Browne G, et  al. 
DASH diet score and distribution of blood pressure in middle-aged men and women. Am J 
Hypertens. 2013;26(11):1311–20.
 84. Maruthur NM, Wang N-Y , Appel LJ. Lifestyle interventions reduce coronary heart disease 
risk: results from the PREMIER trial. Circulation. 2009;119(15):2026–31.
 85. Cook NR, Cutler JA, Obarzanek E, Buring JE, Rexrode KM, Kumanyika SK, et al. Long term 
effects of dietary sodium reduction on cardiovascular disease outcomes: observational follow-
 up of the trials of hypertension prevention (TOHP). BMJ. 2007;334(7599):885. http://www.
bmj.com/cgi/doi/10.1136/bmj.39147.604896.55.
 86. Rodenburg EM, Stricker BH, Visser LE.  Sex differences in cardiovascular drug-induced 
adverse reactions causing hospital admissions. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2012;74(6):1045–52.
A. Olszanecka and D. Czarnecka627
 87. Julius S, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, Weber MA, Michelson EL, Kaciroti N, et al. Feasibility of treat-
ing prehypertension with an angiotensin-receptor blocker. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(16):1685–
97. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16537662.
 88. Luders S, Schrader J, Berger J, Unger T, Zidek W, Bohm M, et  al. The PHARAO study: 
prevention of hypertension with angiotensin-converting enyme inhibitor ramipril in patients 
with high normal blood pressure: a prospective, randomized, controlled prevention trial of the 
German Hypertension League. J Hypertens. 2008;26(7):1487–96.
 89. Fuchs SC, Poli-de-Figueiredo CE, Figueiredo Neto JA, Scala LCN, Whelton PK, Mosele F, 
et al. Effectiveness of chlorthalidone plus amiloride for the prevention of hypertension: The 
PREVER-prevention randomized clinical trial. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5(12):e004248.
 90. Boggia J, Thijs L, Hansen TW, Li Y , Kikuya M, Björklund-Bodegård K, et al. Ambulatory 
blood pressure monitoring in 9357 subjects from 11 populations highlights missed opportuni-
ties for cardiovascular prevention in women. Hypertension. 2011;57(3):397–405.38 Management of Prehypertension and Hypertension in Women629 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_39
R. Zimlichman  
Medicine and Hypertension Institute, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel 
Brunner Institute for Cardiovascular Research, Sackler Faculty of Medicine,  
Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv-Yafo, Israel 
Institute for Quality in Medicine, Israeli Medical Association, Ramat Gan, Israel
e-mail: zimlich@post.tau.ac.il39Non-pharmacologic Approaches 
for the Management of Prehypertension
Reuven Zimlichman
For many years there has been a dispute regarding which goal levels of blood 
pressure (BP) are considered normal, optimal, and abnormal. Generally, the defini-
tion gradually decreases, being based upon risk calculations and consequently, the 
recommendation for non-pharmacological and pharmacologic treatment change 
accordingly.
The relationship between BP and cardiovascular (CV) risk is linear, beginning at 
a BP of 115/75 mmHg, cardiovascular risk doubles for each increase of 20/10 mmHg. 
Thus, even individuals with prehypertension have an increased risk of stroke, myo-
cardial infarction, and total CV events [1].
Therapeutic decisions are based upon cost benefit ratio. The costs to be consid-
ered are financial expenses by the patients and the general population as well as 
nonfinancial aspects, as the commitment to comply with a therapeutic approach. 
The benefit is estimated by the measured risk reduction, frequently by surrogate 
endpoints and optimally by reduction in morbidity and mortality. The success in 
reducing morbidity and mortality is determined by choosing the appropriate inter -
vention and by both the feasibility and success of the intervention.
In this chapter I will review the basic concepts of the therapeutic approach to 
prehypertension, the evidence for its success, who is to be treated, and how. I will 
assess also the feasibility of the interventions.
Of course the main proof of treatment success is reduction of morbidity and 
mortality but its effect on quality of life should be evaluated as well.630
Hypertension is a progressive disease. BP measurements in populations are 
Gaussian and reflect the wide distribution in the population as a whole. Similar pat-
terns of distribution exist in patient subgroups according to age, gender, and con-
comitant disease. While tracking BP levels in specific populations the curves will 
still be of Gaussian shape when converted to logarithmic scale.
The gradual increase in BP is associated with aging. Structural changes in blood 
vessels cause gradual stiffening of the arterial walls increasing the systolic blood 
pressure (SBP). The rate of arterial stiffening differs in patients and is determined 
by genetic factors, concomitant diseases, lifestyle change, etc. The interrelation 
between BP level and arterial stiffening creates a vicious cycle; arterial stiffening 
causes increase in BP and increased BP further enhances the arterial stiffening and 
increases BP. Enhanced rate of arterial stiffening with the resulting increase in SBP 
is termed early vascular aging (EV A).
39.1  Epidemiology of Prehypertension
While considering epidemiological aspects of prehypertension the majority of 
information exists from population studies performed mainly in the USA. The prev-
alence of prehypertension is 31% while hypertension and normotension are 23% 
and 39%, respectively. Thus, about 60% of the adult US population has prehyper -
tension or hypertension [2]. The age-adjusted prevalence of prehypertension is 
greater in men than in women at 39% versus 23.1%, respectively [3].
The risk of developing hypertension in individuals that are 75 years old in the 
USA is approximately 90% and thus methods to prevent progression from prehy-
pertension to hypertension should by studied [4]. Patients with stage 2 prehyperten-
sion (BP of 130–139/85–89 mm Hg) are at threefold or greater risk for progression 
to hypertension, while in those with stage 1 prehypertension (BP of 120–129/80–
84 mm Hg) the risk of progression to hypertension is roughly half of this value. 
Progression from prehypertension to hypertension is affected and accompanied by 
obesity, hyperinsulinemia, insulin resistance, hypertriglyceridemia, reduced LDL 
cholesterol, and elevated amount of small, dense LDL particles.
Compared with normotensives, prehypertensives are more likely to be over -
weight and obese. They have more concomitant CV risk factors and thus a higher 
risk to develop cardiovascular disease (CVD).
Moreover, prehypertensives have additional risk factors, as high levels of fibrino-
gen, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), adipokines, inflammatory cytokines 
and endothelial dysfunction, left ventricular hypertrophy, diastolic dysfunction and 
decreased coronary flow reserve [5]. The accepted therapeutic approach in patients 
with hypertension and prehypertension is “The high risk strategy, in which high risk 
patients, those with 10-year coronary heart disease risk of ≥20%, have to be treated.” 
However, we should also consider the population attributable risk, which estimates 
the number of CV events in those at lower risk. In fact, the number of CV events in 
individuals at low risk is still considerable and probably no less in total than of those 
with high CV risk [6].
R. Zimlichman631
The group of patients with prehypertension defined as having BP level of 120–
139/80–89 is non-homogenous, the CV risk increases gradually with BP levels and 
with the presence of other CV risk factors.
39.2  Risk of Cardiovascular Disease
Several recent meta-analyses on prehypertension and the relative risk for coronary 
disease, stroke, and total CVD included information about office BP measurements 
and most of the included patients were without previous CVD. The findings of these 
meta-analyses confirm that prehypertension increases the risk of CVD; moreover, 
the risk of fatal and nonfatal events was higher in stage 2 prehypertension than in 
stage 1 prehypertension [7–10]. In these meta-analyses the relative risk ratios after 
adjustment for risk factors, as smoking, gender, age, and dyslipidemia, averaged 
about 4.3% with estimated 10-year rate of 43% [11].
Individuals with heart failure or coronary artery disease were at even higher risk.
The Strong Heart Study revealed that individuals with prehypertension alone 
were almost twice as likely to develop CVD, while those with diabetes alone were 
almost three times as likely to develop CVD. Moreover, patients with both prehy-
pertension and diabetes were nearly four times more likely to develop CVD.
Since prehypertension is extremely prevalent, about one-third of CV events in 
the global population occur in patients with prehypertension. Generally, patients 
with prehypertension have an annual absolute excess of CVD of 0.31–0.61% with 
an average of 0.5% approximately. If about 30 million subjects in the USA have 
stage 2 prehypertension, this population will include about 150,000 excess CV 
events annually [11, 12].
39.3  Non-pharmacological Interventions
Lifestyle modification includes interventions such as weight loss, dietary alterna-
tion, exercise, cessation of smoking, and relaxation methods. Dietary intervention 
includes multiple variables, among these are weight loss, change in dietary habits, 
including reduced sodium content and moderation of alcohol consumption, and 
additional dietary components that are sometimes difficult to isolate by their spe-
cific effects in total lifestyle intervention, therefore resulting in somewhat inconsis-
tent evidence. Nonetheless, all of these lifestyle modifications have been shown 
beneficiary, not only in hypertensive patients but also in diabetics, obese, and other 
groups with increased CV risk.
A review published in 1978 stated that exercise should be recommended to 
mildly hypertensive patients as well as to the entire public for its long-term benefit 
in weight control in a sedentary society [13].
Many studies have since shown enthusiastic results regarding lifestyle interven-
tion benefits; however, these beneficial results as reducing BP and CV risk have 
been shown in randomized clinical trials. Beyond the strict experimental condition, 39 Non-pharmacologic Approaches for the Management of Prehypertension632
the results are less convincing and sometimes questionable, especially in long-term 
studies. Changing lifestyle is not easy and frequently fails [14], thus results of such 
studies are inconsistent and not always convincing.
The evidence regarding non-pharmacologic treatment of prehypertension and 
hypertension is based on several types of evidence. Epidemiological evidence 
proves the relationship between BP levels and the intervention. This approach does 
not prove a causal relationship and is mainly of suggestive nature. Non- 
pharmacological intervention may act as a marker for the physiological phenomena. 
The non-pharmacological intervention could imply to a direct or indirect causal 
relationship but does not prove it.
Physiological understanding may suggest the causal effect of non- pharmacological 
intervention. However, there is no accepted mechanistic hypothesis that can explain 
the influence of non-pharmacological intervention on BP reduction. Also conclud-
ing from similar interventions in animals is problematic, because the mechanisms of 
experimental hypertension in various animal models differ from the mechanisms in 
human hypertension. Thus, research in this field has to rely on properly conducted 
interventional studies in humans. Several major obstacles in such studies are proper 
blinding of study participants, creation of large groups of subjects, and defining a 
limited number of variables in the intervention studied [15].
39.4  Weight Reduction
A direct positive relation has been found between body weight or body mass and 
BP. The Intersalt study that included 52 communities worldwide found that with the 
exception of age, weight had the strongest and most consistent correlation with BP 
level [16]. Also, individuals with central or upper body obesity with higher waist-
to- hip ratio are more likely to have higher BP and increased risk to develop CV 
morbidity and mortality [17]. European and US guidelines state that the lowest all-
cause mortality rates are at BMI range of 20–25 kg/m2 [18, 19].
The exact optimal body composition is disputed in the literature. Practically 
weighing the patient or determining his weight does not enable to determine the fat/
muscle composition; these data can be useful in identifying subjects that will benefit 
from weight loss. Achieving a loss of 6–8% of body weight can lead to 5 and 4 mm 
Hg decrease in systolic blood pressure (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP), 
respectively, and weight loss of about 10 kg may lower SBP by 5–20 mm Hg [20].
In another study it has been shown that weight reduction lowers BP, even while 
sodium and potassium dietary content are kept constant. A weight loss of about 5 kg 
was associated with decline of 5.4/2.4 mm Hg and an addition of sodium restriction 
to weight loss was associated with additional BP decline [21].
The mechanism of increased BP in obese subjects is not entirely clear.
The sympathetic nervous system activity which is increased in obesity most 
probably plays a role in the pathogenetic mechanism, with activation of the plasma 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, expansion of plasma volume, hyperinsu-
linemia and increased inflammatory markers.
R. Zimlichman633
It has been shown that weight reduction lowers BP. When sodium and potassium 
intake was constant during the follow-up, a weight loss of about 5 Kg was associ-
ated with a BP decline of 5.4/4.2 mmHg and when sodium restriction was added it 
further enhanced the BP decline [21].
Weight loss in overweight subjects not only lowers BP, it has been shown to 
lower total cholesterol, to correct insulin resistance, to lower plasma renin activity, 
and to diminish cardiac output. However, these changes were not associated with 
cardiovascular and all-cause mortality. Both National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey (NHANES) and Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial 
(MRFIT) studies have shown increased cardiovascular and all-cause mortality [22].
Despite the evidence of the obesity paradox in CVD, weight loss is a well- 
accepted and proven method to lower BP in patients with hypertension. Moreover, 
it was suggested that the adverse effect was limited only to lean subjects and weight 
loss should be recommended for obese individuals.
A well-accepted concept during the years is that weight loss as well as other 
lifestyle interventions should be adopted in order to replace or augment effects of 
drug therapy, in all patients with hypertension. This approach is especially reward-
ing in subjects with prehypertension and mild hypertension, in which lifestyle mod-
ification and especially weight loss may obviate the need to begin pharmacological 
treatment. In a prospective study, placebo control subjects who lost 4.5 kg had a BP 
decline similar to that achieved by chlorthalidone or atenolol [23].
39.4.1  The Efficacy of Lifestyle Interventions
Several studies have evaluated the impact of lifestyle interventions on BP levels and 
on progression to hypertension. Trials of hypertension prevention (TOHP II) was an 
intensive long-term study of lifestyle interventions. 2382 participants with DBP of 
83–89 mmHg and SBP of <140 mmHg were randomized to usual care, weight loss, 
and sodium restriction or a combination of the latter two [24]. Over 4 years 44.4% 
of the usual care group developed hypertension compared to 38.5% (RR = 0.87, P- 
0.06) of the weight loss group. 38.1% of the sodium restriction group and 37.6% 
(RR = 0.85, P = 0.01) of the combined group developed hypertension—in this study 
hypertension diagnosis was based upon a single BP measurement. This intensive 
lifestyle modification caused absolute reduction of 6–7% and relative reduction of 
13–15% in the development of hypertension [5].
The Oslo diet and Anti-Smoking trial included 1234 men 40–50 years old 
which were in the upper quartile of risk, based on total cholesterol, smoking, 
and BP. Participants with SBP higher than 150 mmHg were excluded. Participants 
in the intervention group reduced intake of fat calories from 28 to 44% (p  < 0.01), 
increased the ratio of polyunsaturated fat to saturated fat intake from 1.01 to 
0.39 (p  < 0.01), raised fiber consumption from 4.4 to 6.0 g/day (p  < 0.05), low-
ered total cholesterol from 341 to 263 mg/dl (p  < 0.01), decreased cigarette use 
from 10 to 6 per day, and lost weight of 3.7 versus 0.6 kg in the control group 
[25, 26].39 Non-pharmacologic Approaches for the Management of Prehypertension634
Together the Oslo Diet and Smoking study and the TOHP II studies have shown 
that lifestyle intervention can prevent and/or delay the onset of hypertension and of 
CV events in subjects at risk. Additional studies in the field mostly confirmed these 
findings but these were more limited due to difficulties in standardization, partici-
pant compliance, and the presence of multiple confounders which limited isolation 
of specific components of the intervention.
Based on the concept of the efficacy of lifestyle interventions, a trend to improve 
lifestyle was seen in the USA. It has been shown that during the years 1963 to 1975 
consumption of salt, saturated fat, and smoking declined [27]. However, evidence of 
contradictory trends in the recent years show a growing epidemic of obesity and the 
associated increase in diabetes which leads to trends of increased rates of hyperten-
sion and concomitant risk of CVD.
Most individuals with prehypertension have at least one concomitant condition 
associated with increased CV risk. The NHANES and the NHANES II mortality 
studies showed that more than 90% of individuals with prehypertension have one or 
more CV risk factors, i.e., dyslipidemia, early family history of CVD, smoking, 
obesity, hyperinsulinemia with insulin resistance, impaired fasting glucose, pro-
thrombotic state, endothelial dysfunction, and increased vascular stiffness.[28]
The lifestyle intervention arm of the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) enrolled 
1079 subjects with impaired glucose tolerance. The goal of this study was a mini-
mum of 7% weight loss and a minimum of 150 minutes of physical activity per 
week with a moderate caloric restriction (500–700 less calories per day) engaging 
in physical activity of moderate intensity. After a 2.8-year follow-up, the interven-
tion showed a 58% reduction in the incidence of diabetes [29]. In addition, the study 
showed a decreased need for antihypertensive medications, and less occurrences of 
new cases of hypertension.
In the DPP study the prevalence of hypertension was about 30% in the compari-
son groups. After 3 years of follow-up it was about 40% in the placebo and metfor -
min arms but remained about 30% in the intensive lifestyle arm, representing a risk 
reduction of 33% in the development of hypertension in the intensive lifestyle inter -
vention group compared with placebo and metformin arms [30].
39.5  Dietary Modification
Nutrition habits and their correlation to BP have been examined in several studies. 
The European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) study 
demonstrated that in 7061 non-hypertensive women (35–64  years) body weight, 
waist circumference, body mass index (BMI), and consumption of processed meat, 
wine, and potatoes directly correlated with BP levels. This study also demonstrated 
that increasing consumption of vegetables, eggs, and yoghurt decreased SBP and 
DBP [31].
The recent NutriNet–Sante study reported a similar relationship between nutri-
tion and BP levels in 8670 healthy volunteers and an inverse association between 
BP and fruit and vegetable consumption [32].
R. Zimlichman635
The dietary approaches to stop hypertension (DASH) were a landmark study in 
the field of dietary lifestyle modification which affected nutrition patterns 
worldwide.
The DASH diet includes low fat dairy products with high intake of fruits, vege-
tables, and fiber. It is difficult to define which specific nutrients exerted the benefi-
ciary effect of the DASH diet intervention, and most probably a combination of 
several of its components contribute to the favorable outcomes [33].
The DASH Diet lowered BP in all subgroups; these effects were more pro-
nounced in African Americans with BP reduction effects being stronger in hyper -
tensive than non-hypertensive subjects [34]. The DASH study has shown significant 
reduction in both SBP and DBP with magnitudes to pharmacotherapy for mild 
hypertension. Despite the limited evidence on the long-term effects of the DASH 
diet it is recommended, with weight loss and physical activity, for prevention and 
management of BP [19].
The Exercise and Nutrition interventions for CardiOvasculaR hEalth (ENCORE) 
study evaluated the long-term effects of the DASH study. The participants were fol-
lowed for 8  months after the completion of 16-week intervention. The results 
showed beneficiary effects; nonetheless, methods that will ensure long-term com-
pliance with intervention should be developed [35].
Improvement of dietary habits can reduce BP levels, postpone or even prevent 
progression to hypertension if practiced over a long period. A study published in 1950 
reported that Cretan population has lower prevalence of hypertension, CVD as myo-
cardial infarction and stroke and even some types of cancer [36]. This study stimu-
lated the research on benefits of living in the Mediterranean area. One of the major 
determinants studied was the differences in the diet in the Mediterranean region 
defined as the “Mediterranean diet.” The characteristics of this diet are—high content 
of monosaturated fatty acids (MUFA) and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). Other 
characteristics are moderate consumption of alcohol and dairy products, increased 
intake of fruits and vegetables, and low intake of red meat and processed red meat 
products. The Mediterranean diet is rich in fiber, phenols, flavonoids, isoflavones, 
phytosterols, other plant acids, and phytochemicals which probably have beneficial 
effects on oxidative stress and mainly on the cardiovascular and nervous systems [37].
The SUN study evaluated 9408 subjects followed up for 6 years consuming the 
Mediterranean diet. The intervention was associated with decrease in SBP and DBP 
levels. Moderate implementation of the diet was associated with a decrease of 
2.4/1.3 mmHg while strict implication decreased BP further (3.1/1.0 mmHg). In 
addition, adoption of the diet in patients with very high CV risk resulted in SBP 
reduction of 7.1 mmHg [38].
In the ATTICA study, 1188 subjects without CVD but with BP levels at prehy-
pertensive range adopted the Mediterranean diet and were followed up for 5 years 
for development of hypertension. Among 798 subjects that returned during the 
5-year follow-up period, 18.7% of the men and 24.6% of the women were diag-
nosed as hypertensive [39].
The mechanisms of effect of the Mediterranean diet on BP reduction are most 
probably multifactorial and are not fully understood. It appears that the diet has 39 Non-pharmacologic Approaches for the Management of Prehypertension636
beneficiary effects on BP and CV event reduction but physical activity and other 
measures probably play a role in this effect.
In a recent meta-analysis involving 50 studies and 534,906 subjects it has been 
shown that the Mediterranean diet lowered BP levels and the incidence of the meta-
bolic syndrome and its components [40].
39.6  Sodium Intake
Change in the consumed diet with accompanying weight reduction is always associ-
ated with changes in dietary constituents, while many of these are suggested as of 
specific influence on BP. It is well accepted that excess sodium intake is a key driver 
of high BP across age, sex, and ethnic groups [41].
Current clinical guidelines limit sodium intake to a maximum of 2400 mg/day in 
prehypertensive patients and as a complimentary approach to pharmacological ther -
apy in hypertensive subjects [41]. The main justification of this approach was pro-
vided in the global sodium consumption survey of 66 countries [18].
In another study the DASH diet lowered BP at all three different sodium levels. 
Changing from the intermediate to low sodium diet resulted in additional BP reduc-
tion [42].
There is strong evidence for sodium depletion associated with BP decline. 
Moreover, sodium depletion enhances the BP response to antihypertensive treat-
ment and especially to angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and 
angiotensin- receptor blockers (ARBs). The mechanisms of sodium-induced effect 
on BP are not entirely clear. Sodium is involved with the renin-angiotensin-  
aldosterone system in controlling volume and blood vessel constriction and main-
taining blood flow and blood pressure. Nonetheless, it cannot be excluded that 
other dietary associated changes, in this type of diet, affect BP levels. Moreover, 
the exclusion of other confounding factors as body weight, alcohol consumption, 
etc. weaken the scope and significance of BP decrease [17]. Studies have shown 
that migration from a low to high sodium environment was accompanied by BP 
increase, but it is clear that additional lifestyle changes exist in migration of 
populations.
It has been found that individuals differ in their response to salt, thus two groups 
were defined—salt-sensitive and salt-resistant subjects.
It is widely accepted that dietary sodium restriction should be recommended, and 
when reduced will lower BP in some, but not all normotensive, prehypertensive and 
hypertensive subjects. The dietary sodium in various populations is usually between 
100 and 200 mmol/day and sodium content of more than 200 mmol/day should be 
strongly discouraged. Severe sodium restriction, as shown in several short-term 
studies, is efficacious but impractical in the long run. Low compliance with sodium 
reduced diets is always a limiting factor in the practical dietary approach. It has 
been show that assistance of dietary consulting by nutritionist improves dietary 
compliance.
R. Zimlichman637
Optimally dietary salt content of about 70–90 mmol/day should be advised. It 
has been suggested that a threshold dietary reduction of more than 50 mmol/d must 
be practiced in order to significantly induce BP decrease [43].
In order to significantly reduce dietary salt levels, abstinence from processed fast 
foods and a total change in dietary habits is required. Interventions to lower dietary 
sodium content should not be limited to sodium alone, they should by multifaceted 
and include the whole range intervention of complete lifestyle changes of which 
sodium restriction is important but only one of many components. The response to 
salt reduction is inconsistent, it should be evaluated in all subjects. In some patients 
with prehypertension it may prevent and delay beginning of pharmacological treat-
ment and may delay the appearance of hypertension.
Other nutritional factors in the non-pharmacological approach to treat prehyper -
tension and hypertension have been discussed in the literature. The effect of potas-
sium on BP in intervention trials is inconsistent. Observational studies suggested 
that individuals with greater intake of potassium have lower incidence of stroke 
[44]. However, it is not clear whether the effect is of potassium alone or other dif-
ferent constituents of the diet are responsible for this change.
Magnesium is a vasodilator and was traditionally used to control BP in eclamp-
sia and preeclampsia, but there is absolutely no evidence in population studies to 
justify its use in the treatment of prehypertension and hypertension. Reduced dietary 
content of calcium was associated with increased BP in population studies but the 
results of calcium supplementation were inconsistent [45]. Increased dietary poly-
unsaturated fat and reduction in saturated fat have been suggested but not confirmed 
as hypotensive agents.
39.7  Alcohol Restriction
Alcohol consumption and its association with several cardiovascular diseases fol-
lows a J-shaped curve. Light alcohol consumption protects from CVD compared to 
nondrinkers while overconsumption exponentially increases the risk of CVD and 
CV events [46]. Acute excess of alcohol (binge drinking) causes multiple cardiovas-
cular deleterious effects. A study that evaluated the effect of one or more episodes 
of binge drinking per week found excess of prehypertension prevalence in both men 
and women [47].
Chronic excess of alcohol increases the risk of hypertension in a dose-dependent 
manner and increases the risk of stroke and myocardial infarction [48].
A meta-analysis that evaluated mainly observational studies in the field noted 
significant reduction in SBP (−3.3 mmHg) and DBP (−2.0 mmHg) in response to 
intervention counseling programs [49].
Despite the observational evidence of cardio-protective effect of light to moder -
ate drinking (up to one drink per day in women and up to two drinks in men), this 
recommendation in nondrinkers should not be adopted since excess drinking and 
alcoholism can develop at later stages of life.39 Non-pharmacologic Approaches for the Management of Prehypertension638
39.8  Physical Exercise
Physical exercise is recommended by all guidelines for the whole population—nor -
motensives, prehypertensives, and hypertensives. The higher the CV risk, the stron-
ger the recommendation. Observational data suggest that active and fit individuals 
have lower BP and lower CV mortality and morbidity [17].
Although many interventional clinical trials of exercise training have been per -
formed, not all were controlled, and excluded multiple confounding factors to 
enable reaching conclusive results.
Exercise is characterized by several categories. Dynamic aspects of physical 
activity are considered isotonic and refer to joint and large muscle movement 
in contrast to isometric exercise, which includes contraction of muscles with-
out movement of joints. The consideration of aerobic exercise includes changes 
in availability and use of oxygen for energy production and muscle contraction 
[50]. It is speculated that exercise provides cardio-protection of the vascular 
wall and that repeated bouts of sheer stress confer a vascular conditioning 
effect, increase in endothelial nitric oxide, a vasodilator that reduces 
BP. Repeated bouts of exercise may induce resetting of the baroreceptors low-
ering resting BP [51].
A large number of studies have been performed to evaluate the effects of aerobic 
and resistance BP in normotensive, prehypertensive, and hypertensive subjects.
A recent review confirmed that exercise lowered BP independent of weight loss. 
Generally, studies using conventional measurements of BP were more consistent 
than ambulatory BP measurements. In meta-analysis that included 54 randomized 
controlled studies, including aerobic intervention, a significant reduction of BP 
(3.8/2/6 mmHg) was found [52].
Another meta-analysis examined resistance exercise and showed a BP decrease 
of 3+/−3/3+/−2 mmHg in studies that lasted ≥4 weeks [53].
However, resistance exercise has been shown to increase arterial stiffness and is 
not recommended as antihypertensive treatment. The data regarding increasing arte-
rial stiffness were not confirmed in women and future studies are needed in this 
field.
39.9  Biofeedback, Stress and Coping in Prehypertension 
and Hypertension
It is well accepted that an acute episode of stress will cause BP elevation. This 
change will be for a limited time period. BP increases in response to surrounding 
events are seen in normotensive, prehypertensive, as well in hypertensive subjects. 
It is less obvious whether repeated episodes of stress and/or chronic stress will 
induce chronic increase in BP to prehypertensive and hypertensive levels. A major 
factor that complicates the issue further is the fact that different subjects respond 
differently to similar degrees of stress. This response is affected by genetic and pos-
sible prenatal factors, but clearly and mainly by environmental and constitutional 
factors. Moreover, BP response to stress is further complicated as it is influenced by 
R. Zimlichman639
additional factors as arterial stiffness which also affects the BP response to stress 
(the stiffer the arteries, the greater the increase in BP).
Multiple methods have been suggested for coping with stress. One of them is 
Biofeedback-assisted relaxation therapy. Several studies found that psychological 
intervention reduces BP. These studies were relatively short (around 10 week pro-
gram) in which subjects received psychological treatment or biofeedback [54].
In another study the resperate device was used to achieve slow, deep breathing in 
order to achieve relaxation response. A significant decrease in BP was achieved 
after 8 weeks of using the device [55]. Additional studies confirmed these findings.
Additional stress reduction programs have been suggested and achieved success 
in BP reduction. These included breathing, meditation, and relaxation interventions. 
The possible mechanisms of relaxation and biofeedback approaches are involved 
with the balance between the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. 
Generally, stimulation of parasympathetic nervous system activity reduces BP.
Since patients with prehypertension are usually treated with non- pharmacological 
measures, this is the ideal target population for stress reduction approach as well. 
Several points should be highlighted while estimating the value of stress reduction 
programs. The efficacy of stress reduction will be higher in stressed, tense subjects, 
therefore these subjects should be selected for this type of intervention. The likelihood 
of response is associated with adherence to medical recommendation, willingness, 
and ability to follow instructions, for home and workplace relaxation sessions [54].
It should be remembered that selection of proper patients for this type of inter -
vention is important. Although several short-term studies showed the effectiveness 
of this intervention, long-term compliance is essential and will determine the long- 
term effect of the intervention.
 Conclusions
BP and the risk of CVD correlate throughout the BP range. Since hypertension 
is a progressive disease correlated best with age but also with CV risk factors 
gradual increase in BP is accompanied by proportional increase in arterial stiff-
ness and CV events. Interventional procedures along this continuum will depend 
upon cost/benefit ratio, generally the higher the BP, the higher the risk and higher 
the benefit of the intervention.
Prehypertensives are more likely to be obese and have additional CV risk fac-
tors and are more likely to progress to overt hypertension. Thus, it is justified to 
make every effort to prevent progression to hypertension, with its concomitant 
consequences. While the question of pharmacological treatment in prehyperten-
sive patients is debated there is no doubt that non-pharmacological treatment 
should be practiced in these subjects.
Dietary modification, weight loss, regular physical activity, moderation of 
alcohol intake, and other lifestyle changes have been shown to reduce BP, pre-
vent or delay progression to hypertension, and reduce CV events. Also these 
interventions can diminish the need for pharmacological treatment. Lifestyle 
modification is important for the prehypertensive population but is also equally 
important for the healthy population. Education and practice of a healthy life-
style should be pursued by all.39 Non-pharmacologic Approaches for the Management of Prehypertension640
References
 1. Guo X, Zhang X, Guo L, et al. Association between pre-hypertension and cardiovascular out-
comes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. Curr Hypertens Rep. 
2013;15:703–16.
 2. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. The seventh report of the joint national committee 
on prevention, detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood pressure: the JNC 7 report. 
JAMA. 2003;289:2560–71.
 3. Greenlund KJ, Croft JB, Mensah GA.  Prevalence of heart disease and stroke risk fac-
tors in persons with prehypertension in the United States, 1999–2000. Arch Intern Med. 
2004;164:2113–8.
 4. Nesbitt SD.  Treatment options for prehypertension. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 
2007;16:250–5.
 5. Egan BM, Nesbitt SD, Julius S. Prehypertension: should we be treating with pharmacologic 
therapy? Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis. 2008;2:305–14.
 6. Rose G. Strategy of prevention: lessons from cardiovascular disease. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed). 
1981;282:1847.
 7. Huang Y , Cai X, Li Y , et al. Prehypertension and the risk of stroke a meta-analysis. Neurology. 
2014;82:1153–61.
 8. Huang Y , Su L, Cai X, et al. Association of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality with prehy-
pertension: a meta-analysis. Am Heart J. 2014;167:160–8.
 9. Huang Y , Wang S, Cai X, et al. Prehypertension and incidence of cardiovascular disease: a 
meta-analysis. BMC Med. 2013;11:177.
 10. Guo X, Zhang X, Zheng L, et al. Prehypertension is not associated with all-cause mortality: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. PLoS One. 2013;8:e61796.
 11. Egan BM, Stevens-Fabry S. Prehypertension [mdash] prevalence, health risks, and manage-
ment strategies. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015;12:289–300.
 12. Zhang Y , Lee ET, Devereux RB, et al. Prehypertension, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease 
risk in a population-based sample. Hypertension. 2006;47:410–4.
 13. Blackburn H.  Non-pharmacologic treatment of hypertension. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 
1978;304:236–42.
 14. Fuchs FD. Prehypertension: the rationale for early drug therapy. Cardiovasc Ther. 2010;28:339–43.
 15. Swales JD. Non-pharmacological antihypertensive therapy. Eur Heart J. 1988;9:45–52.
 16. Rose G, Stamler J, Stamler R, et al. Intersalt: an international study of electrolyte excretion 
and blood pressure. Results for 24 hour urinary sodium and potassium excretion. Br Med J. 
1988;297:319–28.
 17. Alderman MH. Non-pharmacological treatment of hypertension. Lancet. 1994;344:307–11.
 18. Mozaffarian D, Fahimi S, Singh GM, et al. Global sodium consumption and death from car -
diovascular causes. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:624–34.
 19. Van Horn L. Dietary sodium and blood pressure: how low should we go? Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 
2015;58:61–8.
 20. McLaren L, Sumar N, Barberio AM, et al. Population-level interventions in government juris-
dictions for dietary sodium reduction. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;9:CD010166.
 21. Reisin E, Abel R, Modan M, et al. Effect of weight loss without salt restriction on the reduction 
of blood pressure in overweight hypertensive patients. N Engl J Med. 1978;298:1–6.
 22. Dahl LK.  Possible role of salt intake in the development of essential hypertension. Int J 
Epidemiol. 2005;34:967–72.
 23. Wassertheil-Smoller S, Blaufox MD, Oberman AS, et al. The trial of antihypertensive inter -
ventions and management (TAIM) study: adequate weight loss, alone and combined with drug 
therapy in the treatment of mild hypertension. Arch Intern Med. 1992;152:131–6.
 24. Lasser VI, Raczynski JM, Stevens VJ, et al. Trials of hypertension prevention, phase II struc-
ture and content of the weight loss and dietary sodium reduction interventions. Ann Epidemiol. 
1995;5:156–64.
R. Zimlichman641
 25. Hjermann I, et al. Smoking and diet intervention in healthy coronary high risk men. Methods 
and 5-year-follow-up of risk factors in a randomized trial. The Oslo Study. J Oslo City Hosp. 
1980;30:3–17.
 26. Hjermann I, Holme I, Byre KV , et al. Effect of diet and smoking intervention on the incidence 
of coronary heart disease: report from the Oslo Study Group of a randomised trial in healthy 
men. Lancet. 1981;318:1303–10.
 27. Moser M.  A decade of progress in the management of hypertension. Hypertension. 
1983;5:808–13.
 28. Mainous AG, Everett CJ, Liszka H, et al. Prehypertension and mortality in a nationally repre-
sentative cohort. Am J Cardiol. 2004;94:1496–500.
 29. Knowler WC, Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. Reduction in the incidence of 
type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:393–403.
 30. Dagogo-Jack S, Egbuonu N, Edeoga C. Principles and practice of nonpharmacological inter -
ventions to reduce cardiometabolic risk. Med Princ Pract. 2010;19:167.
 31. Reddy KS, Katan MB. Diet, nutrition and the prevention of hypertension and cardiovascular 
diseases. Public Health Nutr. 2004;7:167–86.
 32. Lelong H, Galan P, Kesse-Guyot E, et al. Relationship between nutrition and blood pressure: a 
cross-sectional analysis from the NutriNet-sante study, a French web-based cohort study. Am 
J Hypertens. 2015;28:362–71.
 33. Fung TT, Rimm EB, Spiegelman D, et al. Association between dietary patterns and plasma 
biomarkers of obesity and cardiovascular disease risk. Am J Clin Nutr. 2001;73:61–7.
 34. V ollmer WM, Sacks FM, Ard J, et al. Effects of diet and sodium intake on blood pressure: 
subgroup analysis of the DASH-sodium trial. Ann Intern Med. 2001;135:1019–28.
 35. Hinderliter AL, Sherwood A, Craighead LW, et al. The long-term effects of lifestyle change on 
blood pressure: one-year follow-up of the ENCORE study. Am J Hypertens. 2013;27:734–41.
 36. Allbaugh L. Food and nutrition. In:  Crete: a case study of an underdeveloped area. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press; 1953. p. 97–135.
 37. Vamvakis A, Gkaliagkousi E, Triantafyllou A, et  al. Beneficial effects of nonpharmaco-
logical interventions in the management of essential hypertension. JRSM Cardiovasc Dis. 
2017;6:2048004016683891.
 38. Estruch R, Martinez-González MA, Corella D, et al. Effects of a Mediterranean-style diet on 
cardiovascular risk factors: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2006;145:1–11.
 39. Pitsavos C, Chrysohoou C, Panagiotakos DB, et al. Abdominal obesity and inflammation pre-
dicts hypertension among prehypertensive men and women: the ATTICA study. Heart Vessel. 
2008;23:96–103.
 40. Kastorini C-M, Milionis HJ, Esposito K, et al. The effect of Mediterranean diet on metabolic 
syndrome and its components: a meta-analysis of 50 studies and 534,906 individuals. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:1299–313.
 41. Davy BM, Halliday TM, Davy KP. Sodium intake and blood pressure: new controversies, new 
labels... New guidelines? J Acad Nutr Diet. 2015;115:200–4.
 42. Sacks FM, Svetkey LP, V ollmer WM, et al. Effects on blood pressure of reduced dietary sodium 
and the dietary approaches to stop hypertension (DASH) diet. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:3–10.
 43. MacGregor GA, Sagnella GA, Markandu ND, et  al. Double-blind study of three sodium 
intakes and long-term effects of sodium restriction in essential hypertension. Lancet. 
1989;334:1244–7.
 44. Khaw K-T, Barrett-Connor E. Dietary potassium and stroke-associated mortality. N Engl J 
Med. 1987;316:235–40.
 45. Luft FC. Putative mechanism of blood pressure reduction induced by increases in dietary cal-
cium intake. Am J Hypertens. 1990;3:156S–60S.
 46. O’Keefe JH, Bhatti SK, Bajwa A, et al. Alcohol and cardiovascular health: the dose makes the 
poison… or the remedy. Mayo Clin Proc. 2014;89:382–93.
 47. Piano MR, Mazzuco A, Kang M, et al. Cardiovascular consequences of binge drinking: an 
integrative review with implications for advocacy, policy, and research. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 
2017;41:487–96.39 Non-pharmacologic Approaches for the Management of Prehypertension642
 48. Ozemek C, Phillips SA, Popovic D, et al. Nonpharmacologic management of hypertension: a 
multidisciplinary approach. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2017;32:381–8.
 49. Xue X, Jiang H, Frontini MG, et al. Effects of alcohol reduction on blood pressure: a meta- 
analysis of randomised controlled trials. Hypertension. 2001;38:1112–7.
 50. Lackland DT, V oeks JH. Metabolic syndrome and hypertension: regular exercise as part of 
lifestyle management. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2014;16:492.
 51. Collier SR, Landram MJ.  Treatment of prehypertension: lifestyle and/or medication. Vasc 
Health Risk Manag. 2012;8:613.
 52. Whelton SP, Chin A, Xin X, et al. Effect of aerobic exercise on blood pressure: a meta-analysis 
of randomized, controlled trials. Ann Intern Med. 2002;136:493–503.
 53. Kelley GA, Kelley KS.  Progressive resistance exercise and resting blood pressure. 
Hypertension. 2000;35:838–43.
 54. McGrady A. The effects of biofeedback in diabetes and essential hypertension. Cleve Clin J 
Med. 2010;77:S68–71.
 55. Elliott WJ, Izzo JL, White WB, et al. Graded blood pressure reduction in hypertensive out-
patients associated with use of a device to assist with slow breathing. J Clin Hypertens. 
2004;6:553–9.
R. Zimlichman643 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_40
F. D. Fuchs ( *) 
Division of Cardiology, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, School of Medicine, 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil
e-mail: ffuchs@hcpa.edu.br 
S. C. Fuchs 
Graduate Program in Cardiology, School of Medicine, Universidade Federal  
do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil40Prehypertension: A Case in Favor 
of Early Use of Diuretics
Flávio Danni Fuchs and Sandra Costa Fuchs
The diagnosis of hypertension has faced extraordinary and controversial developments. 
Guidelines [1–5] are going in opposite directions in the establishment of blood pres-
sure (BP) thresholds for diagnosis and goals of treatment. This chapter makes a case 
in favor of leaving behind the diagnosis of prehypertension, which should be pro-
moted to true hypertension. Diuretics are natural candidates to start drug therapy in 
patients who do not respond to nondrug interventions, with preference for more 
efficacious agents associated with a potassium-sparing agent.
40.1  Risks of Prehypertension
The uncovering of the risks of blood pressure elevation with age, together with the 
identification of their causes and the development of effective strategies for its pre-
vention and treatment, are among the outstanding achievements of humankind. 
Businesspersons from life insurance companies firstly noted the risks of high blood 
pressure in 1911 [6]. In the thirties of the last century, however, Paul White still 
stated, on his classic book of heart disease [7], that hypertension could be an impor -
tant compensatory mechanism, which should not be tampered. Dozens of cohort 
studies conducted between the fourth and the ninth decades of the last century, with 
large samples, established beyond any reasonable doubt that high BP was a major 644
cardiovascular risk factor. The thresholds for the starting of risk, however, were 
evident at high blood pressure values, because the low absolute incidence of cardio-
vascular events at lower BP values conferred low statistical power in individual 
studies.
The Prospective Studies Collaboration compiled the individual data of more than 
one million individuals, who were followed for 15 years in 61 cohort studies, with 
56,000 deaths from cardiovascular events [8]. The risk of elevated BP for cardiovas-
cular events increased steadily from 75 and 115 mmHg of diastolic and systolic 
pressures, respectively, doubling every 10 mmHg of diastolic or 20 mmHg of sys-
tolic BP (Fig.  40.1a). Figure  40.1b, with real intervals on the vertical axis, demon-
strated that at lower BP levels the absolute incidence of events was low, particularly 
at younger ages. Duplication of low risks have less absolute impact, with more 
significant increase (inflection of the curve) when the previous absolute risks were 
already high. Points of higher inflection were employed to define the thresholds for 
diagnosis of hypertension in the past.
The increase in the precision to identify BP thresholds for cardiovascular risks 
led to diagnostic values progressively down, from 160/95 mmHg in old guidelines 
to 140/90 mmHg in the current ones. There are solid evidences, however, that they 
should be lower, at least 120/80 mmHg.
Besides CHD and stroke, high systolic or diastolic BP are the major cause of 
many other cardiovascular and non-cardiovascular consequences, such as hyperten-
sive cardiomyopathy, heart failure, aortic valve stenosis, aortic syndromes, periph-
eral arterial disease, atrial fibrillation, chronic kidney disease, dementias, diabetes, 
age-related macular degeneration, and erectile dysfunction [9].
The risks for these outcomes start at prehypertension levels. Besides, prehyper -
tension is a risk for development of full hypertension and target organ damage. In 
a cohort study conducted in Porto Alegre, Brazil, four among five individuals with 
prehypertension developed hypertension in 10 years [10] (Fig.  40.2). Similar inci-
dence has been shown in other populations, such as in a nationwide Japanese 
cohort [11].Log absolute r iskCoronary Hear t Disease or Str oke Coronar y Hear t Disease or Stroke
256
128
64
32
16
8
4
2
1
120 140 160 180
Usual systalic b lood
pressure (mmHg)Usual diastolic b lood pressure
(mmHg)SYST OLIC (mmHg) DIAST OLIC (mmHg)70 8090100 110 120 140 160 180 80 90100 110256
128
64
32
16
8
4
2
1256
128
64
32
1256
128
64
32
1Log absolute r isk Absolute ri sk AgeA ge Age at r isk Age at r isk
80-89 γ
70-79 γ
60-69 γ
50-59 γ
40-49 γ80-89 γ
70-79 γ
60-69 γ
50-59 γ
40-49 γ80-89
70-79
60-69
50-59
40-4980-89
70-79
60-69
50-59
40-49Absolute ri skab
Fig. 40.1 Absolute risk for coronary heart disease or stroke by BP levels, stratified by age groups; 
(a) vertical axis log-transformed; (b) real axis (Reprinted with permission from reference [8] (a) 
and [9] (b))
F. D. Fuchs and S. C. Fuchs645
Target organ damage in individuals with prehypertension has been demonstrated 
in several studies. For instance, in the MONICA cohort, prehypertension was a risk 
for increasing left ventricular mass compared to individuals with normal BP [12] 
(Fig.  40.3). Findings from the ARIC cohort showed that prehypertension was asso-
ciated with heart abnormalities in structure and function in elderly individuals [13]. 
The risks of prehypertension for the development of chronic kidney disease were 
demonstrated in the Kaiser Permanente [14] and Ohasama cohorts [15].
40.1.1  Benefits of Treating Prehypertension
The evidence that treating patients with prehypertension leads to substantial reduc-
tion of cardiovascular outcomes was available for many years, but was restricted to 
patients with cardiovascular disease. Several randomized clinical trials, which 
enrolled patients with coronary heart disease, heart failure, stroke, and diabetes, 8/100/INDIVIDU ALS/YEAR
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
4 among 5 preh ypertensiv e 40 to 49 y ears-old in 10 y ears18-35 36-45 46-55 > 552.04.07.7 7.8Fig. 40.2 Incidence of 
hypertension in population-
based cohort in Porto 
Alegre, Brazil (reprinted 
with permission from the 
reference [9])
165
158
151
143
136
0
1994/95LVM (g)
2004/05P = 0.001preBP
nBP 159.1
144.1
138.9
P = NS
134.0Fig. 40.3 Increase of left 
ventricular mass in 
participants with 
prehypertension and 
optimal BP in the 
MONICA cohort 
(reprinted with permission 
from the reference [12])40 Prehypertension: A Case in Favor of Early Use of Diuretics646
showed the prevention of cardiovascular outcomes with active treatment compared 
to placebo [16– 23] (Table  40.1). The interpretation of the authors of these trials 
was that the benefit was due to pleiotropic effects of the drugs employed in the tri-
als, mostly beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors, and only in one trial, diuretics. The 
blood pressure-lowering effect, however, could explain the beneficial effect of 
drugs in the clinical conditions presented on Table  40.1 [ 24]. This view was con-
firmed in two meta-analyses that included patients with and without hypertension 
[25, 26]. We postulated that drug treatment should be offered to patients with pre-
hypertension, which is a window of opportunity to reduce the consequences of 
high BP [27, 28].
Most authors, who considered that the clinical conditions were confounders of 
the benefit of blood pressure-lowering drugs, disdained the evidences obtained in 
patients with cardiovascular disease. Moreover, the possibility that excessive blood 
pressure reduction could increase the incidence of cardiovascular events, particu-
larly in patients with coronary artery disease (the J-shape phenomenon), was 
accepted by experts and guidelines.
Nonetheless, the J-shape phenomenon should not be a reason for concern in the 
treatment of high BP [29]. The evidences in favor of the existence of the J-shape 
phenomenon came from cohort studies and from post hoc analyses of randomized 
controlled trials. These analyses of randomized trials compared the incidence of 
events in patients with low and high BP achieved during the trial, independently of 
the original randomized group. As in cohort studies, the apparent higher intensity of 
BP lowering may be secondary to the development of subclinical disease or frailty. 
These patients would benefit from further BP reduction [29]. A remarkable example 
is the CONSENSUS trial [23]. Patients randomized to the active treatment arm had 
baseline blood pressure of 118/74 mmHg, and received 18.4 mg per day on average Table 40.1 Beneficial effects of BP-lowering drugs in patients with normal BP and cardiovascu-
lar disease
Clinical conditionStudies 
(reference)Active 
treatment Primary outcome RRR (95% CI)
Diabetes mellitus Micro-HOPE [16] Ramipril MI, stroke, CV 
death25% (12 to 36)
Any evidence of 
atherosclerosisHOPE [17] Ramipril MI, stroke, CV 
death22% (14 to 30)
EUROPA [18] Perindopril MI, CV death, 
or cardiac arrest20% (9 to 29)
Recovery from 
strokePROGRESS [19] Indapamide 
plus perindoprilStroke 42% (19 to 58)
Asymptomatic heart 
failureSOLVED [20] Enalapril CV deaths 12% (−3 to 26)
Overt heart failure SOLVED [21] Enalapril CV deaths 18% (6 to 28)
SA VE [22] Captopril 21% (5 to 35)
Class IV heart failure CONSENSUS [23] Enalapril Total mortality 40% 
(P = 0.002)
RRR relative risk reduction
F. D. Fuchs and S. C. Fuchs647
of enalapril (target dose 40 mg per day). All-cause mortality was 40% lower in the 
active treatment group.
Recent meta-analyses have provided evidences against the existence of a clini-
cally relevant J-shape phenomenon, particularly when they include trials with par -
ticipants with cardiovascular disease [30], and compared more and less intensive 
strategies to lower BP [31]. This benefit was not so evident in a meta-analysis that 
excluded trials with participants with previous cardiovascular disease [32].
There is no trial comparing the effectiveness of drugs to prevent cardiovascular 
disease in patients with prehypertension without cardiovascular disease. The low 
absolute incidence of cardiovascular events in these individuals would require a very 
large sample to reject the null hypothesis. The SPRINT trial [33] provided an indirect 
evidence that individuals with prehypertension benefit from the attempt to reduce 
blood pressure below 120 mmHg. Despite the high cardiovascular risk, few partici-
pants of SPRINT had previous cardiovascular disease and none had diabetes or a 
previous cerebrovascular event. The consistent effectiveness in the prevention of more 
than 30% of cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality in individuals older than 
75 years, free of cardiovascular disease and diabetes, was an impressive finding [34].
The first meta-analysis that maintained participants on their original group of 
randomization was recently published [35]. The lowest risk for cardiovascular dis-
ease and all-cause mortality was at BP between 120 and 124 mmHg (there was 
insufficient statistical power for participants with BP below 120 mmHg). Comparing 
with BP higher than 160  mmHg, participants that reached BP between 120 and 
124 mmHg had a hazard ratio of 0.36 (95% CI, 0.26–0.51) for the incidence of 
major cardiovascular events.
Besides the evidences that drug treatment reduces the incidence of cardiovascu-
lar events, there are evidences that drug treatment reduces the incidence of hyper -
tension and target organ damage.
Two randomized trials enrolled participants with high-normal BP to assess the effi-
cacy of candesartan [36] and ramipril [37] to prevent the development of full hyperten-
sion. In the TROPHY study [36], there was a reduction of 66.3% in the incidence of 
hypertension in 2 years for patients treated with average doses of candesartan. In the 
study PHARAO, ramipril lowered by 34.4% the incidence of hypertension [37].
The PREVER-prevention trial evaluated the effectiveness of a combined pill of 
chlorthalidone (12.5 mg) with amiloride (2.5 mg) to prevent hypertension and target 
organ damage in patients with prehypertension [38]. During a follow-up of 
18 months, individuals under diuretic treatment achieved 46% of prevention in the 
incidence of hypertension in comparison with participants allocated to placebo 
(Fig.  40.4, left). This trial was the first to demonstrate that drug treatment of indi-
viduals with prehypertension prevented the progression of target organ damage. 
Participants allocated to active treatment had reduction of left ventricular mass esti-
mated by electrocardiogram (Fig. 40.4, right).
The evidence reviewed here supports the recommendation to initiate drug ther -
apy in individuals with prehypertension who do not respond to lifestyle-change 
recommendations.40 Prehypertension: A Case in Favor of Early Use of Diuretics648
40.1.2  Drug Preference in the Management of Prehypertension
Placebo-controlled trials demonstrated the effectiveness of drug therapy to prevent 
cardiovascular events and death in patients with prehypertension and cardiovascular 
disease. Trials with patients with heart failure employed ACE inhibitors [20–23] 
and beta-blockers [39, 40]. The meta-analyses of several trials [25] demonstrated 
that beta-blockers are the more efficacious agents in patients recovered from myo-
cardial infarction. Indapamide prevented the recurrence of stroke [19]. ACE inhibi-
tors reduced the incidence of cardiovascular events in patients with chronic coronary 
artery disease and diabetes [16–18].
Diuretics were tested exclusively in the post-stroke trial [19], but are part of the 
management of heart failure. They were highly effective in preventing heart failure 
in several trials, such as the SHEP [41], HYVET [42], and ALLHAT [43] trials. 
Angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARB) were inert in the prevention of cardiovascular 
events in several trials of secondary prevention or in patients with high cardiovascu-
lar risk [44–50]. These and other studies were included in meta-analyses that failed 
to demonstrate the effectiveness of ARB in the prevention of myocardial infarction 
and all-cause mortality [51–56]. Moreover, three large positive trials of ARB were 
retracted because of fraud [57–59]. These evidences suggest that ARB are not the 
best option for patients with hypertension [60, 61] and therefore for patients with 
prehypertension.
In face of the absence of comparative trials of drugs in prehypertension, it is valid 
to consider the mechanism of action of drugs—biological plausibility—one of the 
criteria of causality of Bradford-Hill. The soundest hypothesis on pathogenesis of 
the elevation of BP with age is the maladaptation to chronic sodium overload [9]. 
Individuals with kidneys efficient to retain sodium need higher renal perfusion pres-
sures to excrete the unnatural sodium overload, leading to chronic increase of BP. Chlor thalidone +
Amilo ride (n) 3723 26 2832 53 2422 40 312Months 18 15 12 9 6 3 0Placebo
Chlor talidone+Amilor ide
0510152025HR = 0.56 (0.38–0.82):  P = 0.003
Sokolow-Lyon voltage (mm)
22
21.5
21
20.5
20
0
00 18 m
Placebo Chlor thalidone + Amilor ide20.7
21321.8
229P = 0.02 P = 0.02
18 m235
230
225
220
215
210Sokolow-Lyon voltage duration
product (µVms)%
Placebo (n )3 58 3162 80 2602 35 2252 90Incidence (%) 2.8 2.1 2.4 0.4 1.7 4.5
Incidence (%) 3.8 2.1 3.5 2.6 4.4 8.6
Fig. 40.4 The effect of diuretic treatment on the prevention of hypertension (left) and on ECG 
indexes of left ventricular hypertrophy (right) in patients with prehypertension: The PREVER- 
prevention trial (reprinted with permission from reference [38] (left) and [9] (right))
F. D. Fuchs and S. C. Fuchs649
Diuretics would circumvent this efficiency, promoting the excretion of sodium 
without increasing BP. Tobian, who proposed the concept of pressure natriuresis, 
demonstrated in an experiment that diuretics prevented the increase of blood pres-
sure in experimental [62]. If diuretics were discovered nowadays, they would prob-
ably count with the sympathy of the pharmaceutical industry and doctors at all, and 
would be eventually pointed as the cure of hypertension.
Another postulate of Bradford-Hill—evidence from analogous models—sup-
ports the preference for diuretics in the management of prehypertension. The results 
of randomized controlled trials with patients with hypertension will likely be repro-
duced in prehypertension. Despite the worldwide preference for ARB and other 
groups, diuretics, in particular chlorthalidone, are the more effective agents in the 
prevention of many cardiovascular events in patients with hypertension. They were 
the only group that showed consistent superiority over placebo in the prevention of 
stroke, coronary heart disease, heart failure, cardiovascular and all-cause mortality, 
as demonstrated in one of the series of meta-analyses by Thomopoulos and coau-
thors [56]. The effect size was significantly higher with diuretics, even in events that 
were prevented by other classes. ARB, again, had the worst record, and did not 
avoid the occurrence of coronary heart disease, cardiovascular and all-cause 
mortality.
The largest and best-designed randomized clinical trial that compared four 
classes of drugs was the ALLHAT trial [63, 64]. The incidence of heart failure, 
identified by hospitalization or death, was 35% higher in patients treated with amlo-
dipine compared to those treated with chlorthalidone. Several outcomes were more 
frequent in patients treated with lisinopril compared to patients treated with 
chlorthalidone: 15% more strokes, 10% more cardiovascular disease, and 19% more 
cases of heart failure, among others. Figure  40.5 shows the comparison of efficacy 
of chlorthalidone with amlodipine and with lisinopril in the prevention of major 
cardiovascular outcomes.
Myocardial inf arction 0.98 (0.90-1.07)
Stroke 0.93 (0.82-1.06)
Revascular ization 1.09 (1.00-1.20)
Hear t failure 1.38 (1.25-1.52)
CV eve nts 1.04 (0.99-1.09)
0.5Outcomes RRRisk by
chlor thalidoneRisk by
amlodipine
1.0 1.5 0.5 1.0 1.5Myocardial inf arcction 0.99 (0.91-1.08)
Stroke 1.15 (1.02-1.30)
Revascular ization 1.10 (1.00-1.21)
Hear t failure 1.19 (1.07-1.31)
CV eve nts 1.10 (1.05-1.16)Outcomes RRRisk by
clortalidonaRisk by
lisinopr il
Fig. 40.5 Relative risk (RR) for incidence of cardiovascular outcomes in patients allocated to 
chlorthalidone and amlodipine (left) and chlorthalidone and lisinopril (right) in the ALLHAT study 
(reprinted with permission from [9])40 Prehypertension: A Case in Favor of Early Use of Diuretics650
40.1.3  Why Chlorthalidone Associated with Potassium-Sparing 
Diuretics?
There are no head-to-head trials with hard outcomes comparing different diuretics. 
An old network meta-analysis showed equivalence between different agents, but 
there were few studies available for comparison [65]. Another network meta- 
analysis included comparisons of chlorthalidone and hydrochlorothiazide with 
other active treatments, in addition to the comparison with placebo [66]. 
Chlorthalidone was superior to hydrochlorothiazide in the prevention of cardiovas-
cular events despite the similar effects over office BP.
In a retrospective analysis of the MRFIT trial [67], the incidence of cardiovascu-
lar events was lower during the periods of treatment with chlorthalidone than 
hydrochlorothiazide.
Studies compared directly and indirectly the BP-lowering effectiveness of 
chlorthalidone, hydrochlorothiazide, and other diuretics. In a randomized crossover 
clinical trial, chlorthalidone (25 mg) had a more intense effect over nightly ambula-
tory blood pressure than hydrochlorothiazide (50 mg) [68]. In a meta-analysis of 
clinical trials with short duration [69], the BP-lowering efficacy of hydrochlorothia-
zide was equivalent to that of other antihypertensives only when used at a dose of 
50 mg. Another meta-analysis compared the BP-lowering effect of hydrochlorothia-
zide in 26 trials, chlorthalidone in three trials, and bendroflumethiazide in one trial 
[70]. The estimated dose of each drug predicted to reduce systolic BP by 10 mm Hg 
was 1.4, 8.6, and 26.4 mg, respectively, for bendroflumethiazide, chlorthalidone, 
and hydrochlorothiazide. The only parallel, head-to-head comparison of chlorthali-
done and hydrochlorothiazide was reported in a small randomized and parallel clin-
ical trial with ABP monitoring [71]. There was higher BP-lowering effect of 
chlorthalidone (6.25 mg) than hydrochlorothiazide (12.5 mg) (Fig. 40.6).
Hypokalemia induced by diuretics may lessen their beneficial effect. In a post 
hoc analysis of the SHEP trial [72], participants of the active treatment arm with 
serum potassium below 3.5  mEq/L did not present the beneficial effects of 
chlorthalidone. The reduction in serum potassium also promotes a mild increase in 
15
10
5
0
–5
–10Change in SBP (mm Hg)–15
–20
–25
–30
HCTZ 12.5mg (n = 18) CTD 6.25mg (n = 16)6:00:00 AM
8:00:00 AM10:00:00 AM12:00:00 AM
2:00:00 AM
4:00:00 AM6:00:00 AM8:00:00 AM10:00:00 AM12:00:00 AM2:00:00 AM4:00:00 AMFig. 40.6 Effects of 
chlorthalidone versus 
hydrochlorothiazide on  
24 h ABP monitoring 
(Reprinted with permission 
from [71])
F. D. Fuchs and S. C. Fuchs651
blood glucose observed in patients treated with thiazide diuretics [73]. Old uncon-
trolled studies identified the potassium-sparing effect of amiloride, triamterene, and 
spironolactone. Contemporaneous randomized trials confirmed this effect. We 
showed that amiloride corrected the serum levels of potassium in patients treated 
with hydrochlorothiazide in the same intensity than enalapril, and had a BP-lowering 
effect as well [74]. The elegant Pathway-3 trial showed that the prevention of loss of 
potassium with amiloride in patients treated with hydrochlorothiazide prevented the 
increase in serum glucose in a glucose tolerance test (Fig.  40.7), besides having a 
BP-lowering effect [75].
The association of hydrochlorothiazide with amiloride was compared with other 
options and placebo in two randomized controlled trials with hard outcomes. In the 
MRC trial of older adults, the association was superior to placebo and atenolol in 
the prevention of stroke, coronary events, and all cardiovascular events [76]. In the 
study INSIGHT [77], patients treated with this association had lower incidence of 
myocardial infarction and heart failure than participants treated with a long-acting 
preparation of nifedipine. The PREVER-prevention trial was the only that tested the 
association of chlorthalidone and amiloride over blood pressure and target organ 
damage [38].
5
4.5
4.0
3.5
0
01 2
Time from baseline (weeks)
2 hr glucose (mmol/L)Serum potassium (mmol/L)
Time from baseline (weeks)24 01 22 48.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
06.0Hydrochlorothiazide 25-50 mg
Amilor ide 10-20 mg
Combination (amilori de 5-10 mg+
hydrochlorothiazide 12.5-25 mg)
Fig. 40.7 Serum potassium (left) and 2-H glucose test (right) after treatment with hydrochloro-
thiazide, amiloride, and the combination of them (Reprinted with permission from [75])40 Prehypertension: A Case in Favor of Early Use of Diuretics652
 Conclusion
The coming years will see a profound shift in the definition of hypertension. The focus 
on early diagnosis and treatment, not waiting for the full development of advanced 
stages of hypertension, may eradicate the consequences of high blood pressure. 
Chlorthalidone associated with amiloride may have preference to start treatment in 
individuals who do not respond to recommendations to change their lifestyle.
References
 1. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, Cushman WC, Dennison-Himmelfarb C, Handler J, et al. 2014 
evidence-based guideline for the management of high BP in adults: report from the panel mem-
bers appointed to the Eighth Joint National Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014;311:507–20.
 2. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redon J, Zanchetti A, Böhm M, et al. ESH/ESC Guidelines 
for the management of arterial hypertension. J Hypertens. 2013;2013(31):1281–57.
 3. Qaseem A, Wilt TJ, Rich R, Humphrey LL, Frost J, Forciea MA, Clinical Guidelines 
Committee of the American College of Physicians and the Commission on Health of the 
Public and Science of the American Academy of Family Physicians. Pharmacologic treatment 
of hypertension in adults aged 60 years or older to higher versus lower blood pressure tar -
gets: a clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians and the American 
Academy of Family Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2017;166(6):430–7.
 4. Leung AA, Nerenberg K, Daskalopoulou SS, McBrien K, Zarnke KB, Dasgupta K, et  al. 
Hypertension Canada’s 2016 Canadian hypertension education program guidelines for blood 
pressure measurement, diagnosis, assessment of risk, prevention, and treatment of hyperten-
sion. Can J Cardiol. 2016;32(5):569–88.
 5. Gabb GM, Mangoni AA, Anderson CS, Cowley D, Dowden JS, Golledge J, et al. Guideline for 
the diagnosis and management of hypertension in adults – 2016. Med J Aust. 2016;205(2):85–9.
 6. Fisher JW. The diagnostic value of the sphygmomanometer in examinations for life insurance. 
JAMA. 1914;63:1752–4.
 7. White P. Heart disease. 2nd ed. New York, NY: McMillan Co; 1937. p. 326.
 8. Prospective Studies Collaboration. Age-specific relevance of usual BP to vascular mortality: 
a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 
2002;360:1903–13.
 9. Fuchs FD. Essentials of hypertension. New york: Springer; 2017.
 10. Moreira LB, Fuchs SC, Wiehe M, Gus M, Moraes RS, Fuchs FD. Incidence of hypertension in 
Porto Alegre, Brazil: a population-based study. J Hum Hypertens. 2008;22:48–50.
 11. Takashima N, Ohkubo T, Miura K, Okamura T, Murakami Y , Fujiyoshi A, et al., NIPPON 
DATA80 Research Group. Long-term risk of BP values above normal for cardiovascular mor -
tality: a 24-year observation of Japanese aged 30 to 92 years. J Hypertens. 2014;32:236–44.
 12. Markus MR, Stritzke J, Lieb W, Mayer B, Luchner A, Döring A, et al. Implications of persis-
tent prehypertension for ageing-related changes in left ventricular geometry and function: the 
MONICA/KORA Augsburg study. J Hypertens. 2008;26:2040–9.
 13. Santos AB, Gupta DK, Bello NA, Gori M, Claggett B, Fuchs FD, et al. Prehypertension is 
associated with abnormalities of cardiac structure and function in the atherosclerosis risk in 
communities study. Am J Hypertens. 2016;29:568–74.
 14. Hsu CY , McCulloch CE, Darbinian J, Go AS, Iribarren C. Elevated blood pressure and risk 
of end-stage renal disease in subjects without baseline kidney disease. Arch Intern Med. 
2005;165(8):923–8.
 15. Kanno A, Kikuya M, Ohkubo T, Hashimoto T, Satoh M, Hirose T, et al. Pre-hypertension as 
a significant predictor of chronic kidney disease in a general population: the Ohasama Study. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2012;27:3218–23.
F. D. Fuchs and S. C. Fuchs653
 16. The Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators. Effects of ramipril on cardio-
vascular and microvascular outcomes in people with diabetes mellitus: results of the HOPE 
study and MICRO-HOPE substudy. Lancet. 2000;355:253–9.
 17. The Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators. Effects of an angiotensin- 
converting- enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on cardiovascular events in high-risk patients. N Engl J 
Med. 2000;342:145–53.
 18. Fox KM, EURopean trial on reduction of cardiac events with Perindopril in stable coronary 
Artery disease Investigators. Efficacy of perindopril in reduction of cardiovascular events 
among patients with stable coronary artery disease: randomised, double-blind, placebo- 
controlled, multicentre trial (the EUROPA study). Lancet. 2003;362:782–8.
 19. PROGRESS Collaborative Group. Randomised trial of a perindopril-based blood-pressure- 
lowering regimen among 6105 individuals with previous stroke or transient ischaemic attack. 
Lancet. 2001;358:1033–41.
 20. The SOLVD investigators. Effect of enalapril on mortality and development of heart fail-
ure in asymptomatic patients with reduced left ventricular ejection fractions. N Engl J Med. 
1992;327:685–91.
 21. The SOLVD investigators. Effect of enalapril on survival in patients with reduced left ventricu-
lar ejection fractions and congestive heart failure. N Engl J Med. 1991;325:669–77.
 22. Pfeffer MA, Braunwald E, Moye LA, Basta L, Brown EJ Jr, Cuddy TE, et al. Effect of capto-
pril on mortality and morbidity in patients with left ventricular dysfunction after myocardial 
infarction: results of the survival and ventricular enlargement trial. The SA VE Investigators. N 
Eng J Med. 1992;327:669–77.
 23. The CONSENSUS Trial Study Group. Effects of enalapril on mortality in severe congestive 
heart failure. N Engl J Med. 1987;316:1429–35.
 24. Fuchs FD. Blood pressure-lowering drugs: essential therapy for some patients with normal 
BP. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2004;2:771–5.
 25. Law MR, Morris JK, Wald NJ. Use of BP lowering drugs in the prevention of cardiovascular 
disease: meta-analysis of 147 randomised trials in the context of expectations from prospective 
epidemiological studies. BMJ. 2009;338:B1665.
 26. Thompson AM, Hu T, Eshelbrenner CL, Reynolds K, He J, Bazzano LA. Antihypertensive 
treatment and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease events among persons without 
hypertension: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 2011;305:913–22.
 27. Fuchs FD.  Prehypertension: the rationale for early drug therapy. Cardiovasc Ther. 
2010;28:339–43.
 28. Fuchs FD, de Mello RB, Fuchs SC. Preventing the progression of prehypertension to hyperten-
sion: role of antihypertensives. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2015;17:505.
 29. Fuchs FD, Fuchs SC. Blood pressure targets in the treatment of high BP: a reappraisal of the 
J-shaped phenomenon. J Hum Hypertens. 2014;28:80–4.
 30. Ettehad D, Emdin CA, Kiran A, Anderson SG, Callender T, Emberson J, et al. Blood pressure 
lowering for prevention of cardiovascular disease and death: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Lancet. 2016;387:957–67.
 31. Xie X, Atkins E, Lv J, Bennett A, Neal B, Ninomiya T, et al. Effects of intensive BP lowering 
on cardiovascular and renal outcomes: updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 
2016;387:43543.
 32. Thomopoulos C, Parati G, Zanchetti A. Effects of BP lowering on outcome incidence in hyper -
tension: 7. Effects of more vs. less intensive BP lowering and different achieved BP levels 
updated overview and meta-analyses of randomized trials. J Hypertens. 2016;34:613–22.
 33. SPRINT Research Group, Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, Whelton PK, Snyder JK, Sink KM, 
Rocco MV , et al. A randomized trial of intensive versus standard blood-pressure control. N 
Engl J Med. 2015;373:2103–16.
 34. Williamson JD, Supiano MA, Applegate WB, Berlowitz DR, Campbell RC, Chertow GM, 
et al. Intensive vs standard BP control and cardiovascular disease outcomes in adults aged ≥75 
years: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2016;315:2673–82.40 Prehypertension: A Case in Favor of Early Use of Diuretics654
 35. Bundy JD, Li C, Stuchlik P, Bu X, Kelly TN, Mills KT, et al. Systolic blood pressure reduction 
and risk of cardiovascular disease and mortality. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2(7):775–81.
 36. Julius S, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, Weber MA, Michelson EL, Kaciroti N, et  al., Trial of 
Preventing Hypertension (TROPHY) Study Investigators. Feasibility of treating prehyperten-
sion with an angiotensin-receptor blocker. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:1685–97.
 37. Lüders S, Schrader J, Berger J, Unger T, Zidek W, Böhm M, et al., PHARAO Study Group. 
The PHARAO study: prevention of hypertension with the angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitor ramipril in patients with high-normal BP  – a prospective, randomized, controlled 
prevention trial of the German Hypertension League. J Hypertens. 2008;26:1487–96.
 38. Fuchs SC, Poli-de-Figueiredo Carlos E, Figueiredo-Neto JA, Scala LC, Whelton PK, Mosele 
F, et al. Effectiveness of chlorthalidone plus amiloride for the prevention of hypertension: The 
PREVER PREVENTION Randomized Clinical Trial. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;e004248:5.
 39. MERIT-HF Study Group. Effect of metoprolol CR/XL in chronic heart failure. Metoprolol 
CR/XL Randomised Intervention Trial in Congestive Heart Failure (MERIT-HF). Lancet. 
1999;353:2001–7.
 40. Poole-Wilson PA, Swedberg K, Cleland JG, Di Lenarda A, Hanrath P, Komajda M, et  al. 
Comparison of carvedilol and metoprolol on clinical outcomes in patients with chronic heart 
failure in the Carvedilol Or Metoprolol European Trial (COMET): randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet. 2003;362:7–13.
 41. SHEP Cooperative Research Group. Prevention of stroke by antihypertensive drug treatment 
in older persons with isolated systolic hypertension. JAMA. 1991;265:3255–64.
 42. Beckett NS, Peters R, Fletcher AE, Staessen JA, Liu L, Dumitrascu D, et  al., HYVET 
Study Group. Treatment of hypertension in patients 80 years of age or older. N Engl J Med. 
2008;358(18):1887–98.
 43. Davis BR, Kostis JB, Simpson LM, Black HR, Cushman WC, Einhorn PT, et al. Heart failure 
with preserved and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction in the antihypertensive and lipid- 
lowering treatment to prevent heart attack trial. Circulation. 2008;118(22):2259–67.
 44. Lithell H, Hansson L, Skoog I, Elmfeldt D, Hofman A, Olofsson B, et  al., SCOPE Study 
Group. The Study on Cognition and Prognosis in the Elderly (SCOPE): principal results of a 
randomized double-blind intervention trial. J Hypertens. 2003;21(5):875–86.
 45. Yusuf S, Sleight P, Anderson C, Teo K, Copland I, Ramos B, et al., TRANSCEND Investigators. 
Effects of the angiotensin-receptor blocker telmisartan on cardiovascular events in high-risk 
patients intolerant to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: a randomized controlled trial. 
Lancet. 2008;372(9644):1174–83.
 46. Yusuf S, Diener HC, Sacco RL, Cotton D, Ôunpuu S, Lawton WA, et al., PRoFESS Study 
Group. Telmisartan to prevent recurrent stroke and cardiovascular events. N Engl J Med. 
2008;359(12):1225–37.
 47. McMurray JJ, Holman RR, Haffner SM, Bethel A, Holzhauer B, Hua TA, et al., NA VIGATOR 
Study Group. Effect of valsartan on the incidence of diabetes and cardiovascular events. N 
Engl J Med. 2010;362(16):1477–90.
 48. Yusuf S, Healey JS, Pogue J, Chrolavicius S, Flather M, Hart RG, et al., ACTIVE I Investigators. 
Irbesartan in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2011;364(10):928–38.
 49. Haller H, Ito S, Izzo JL Jr, Januszewicz A, Katayama S, Menne J, et al., ROADMAP Trial 
Investigators. Olmesartan for the delay or prevention of microalbuminuria in type 2 diabetes. 
N Engl J Med. 2011;364(10):907–17.
 50. Imai E, Chan JC, Ito S, Yamasaki T, Kobayashi F, Haneda H, et al., ORIENT study inves-
tigators. Effects of olmesartan on renal and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes 
with overt nephropathy: a multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled study. Diabetologia. 
2011;54(12):2978–86.
 51. Bangalore S, Kumar S, Wetterslev J, Messerli FH. Angiotensin receptor blockers and risk of 
myocardial infarction: meta-analyses and trial sequential analyses of 147 020 patients from 
randomised trials. BMJ. 2011;342:d2234.
 52. van Vark LC, Bertrand M, Akkerhuis KM, Brugts JJ, Fox K, Mourad JJ, Boersma 
E.  Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors reduce mortality in hypertension: a 
F. D. Fuchs and S. C. Fuchs655
meta- analysis of randomized clinical trials of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibi-
tors involving 158 998 patients. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2088–97.
 53. Cheng J, Zhang W, Zhang X, Han F, Li X, He X, Li Q, Chen J. Effect of angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers on all-cause mortality, cardiovascular 
deaths, and cardiovascular events in patients with diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis. JAMA 
Intern Med. 2014;174:773–85.
 54. Elgendy IY , Huo T, Chik V , Pepine CJ, Bavry AA. Efficacy and safety of angiotensin receptor 
blockers in older patients: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am J Hypertens. 2015;28:576–85.
 55. Bangalore S, Fakheri R, Wandel S, Toklu B, Wandel J, Messerli FH. Renin angiotensin system 
inhibitors for patients with stable coronary artery disease without heart failure: systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. BMJ. 2017;356:j4.
 56. Thomopoulos C, Parati G, Zanchetti A. Effects of blood pressure lowering on outcome inci-
dence in hypertension: 4. Effects of various classes of antihypertensive drugs--overview and 
meta-analyses. J Hypertens. 2015;33(2):195–211.
 57. Retraction. Combination treatment of angiotensin-II receptor blocker and angiotensin- 
converting- enzyme inhibitor in non-diabetic renal disease (COOPERATE): a randomised con-
trolled trial. Lancet. 2009;374(9697):1226.
 58. Retraction. Valsartan in a Japanese population with hypertension and other cardiovascular 
disease (JIKEI HEART STUDY): a randomised, open-label, blinded endpoint morbidity- 
mortality study. Lancet. 2013;382(9895):843.
 59. Retraction. Effects of valsartan on morbidity and mortality in uncontrolled hypertensive patients 
with high cardiovascular risks: KYOTO HEART Study. Eur Heart J. 2013;34(14):1023.
 60. Fuchs FD. The role of angiotensin receptor blockers in the prevention of cardiovascular and 
renal disease: time for reassessment? Evid Based Med. 2013;18:44–7.
 61. Fuchs FD, DiNicolantonio JJ. Angiotensin receptor blockers for prevention of cardiovascular 
disease: where does the evidence stand? Open Heart. 2015;2:e000236.
 62. Tobian L. Evidence for Na-retaining humoral agents and vasoconstrictor humoral agents in 
hypertension-prone Dahl ‘S’ rats. Prevention of NaCl-induced hypertension in Dahl ‘S’ rats 
with thiazide. Horm Res. 1979;11(6):277–91.
 63. ALLHAT Officers. Major cardiovascular events in hypertensive patients randomized to doxa-
zosin vs. chlorthalidone. JAMA. 2000;283:1967–75.
 64. The Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT). 
Major outcomes in high-risk hypertensive patients randomized to angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitor or calcium channel blocker vs diuretic. JAMA. 2002;288(23):2981–97.
 65. Psaty BM, Lumley T, Furberg CD. Meta-analysis of health outcomes of chlorthalidone-based 
vs non-chlorthalidone-based low-dose diuretic therapies. JAMA. 2004;292(1):43–4.
 66. Roush GC, Holford TR, Guddati AK. Chlorthalidone compared with hydrochlorothiazide in 
reducing cardiovascular events: systematic review and network meta-analyses. Hypertension. 
2012;59:1110–7.
 67. Dorsch MP, Gillespie BW, Erickson SR, Bleske BE, Weder AB.  Chlorthalidone reduces 
cardiovascular events compared with hydrochlorothiazide: a retrospective cohort analysis. 
Hypertension. 2011;57:689–94.
 68. Ernst ME, Carter BL, Goerdt CJ, Steffensmeier JJ, Phillips BB, Zimmerman MB, et  al. 
Comparative antihypertensive effects of hydrochlorothiazide and chlorthalidone on ambula-
tory and office blood pressure. Hypertension. 2006;47(3):352–8.
 69. Messerli FH, Makani H, Benjo A, Romero J, Alviar C, Bangalore S. Antihypertensive efficacy 
of hydrochlorothiazide as evaluated by ambulatory blood pressure monitoring: a meta-analysis 
of randomized trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57(5):590–600.
 70. Peterzan MA, Hardy R, Chaturvedi N, Hughes AD. Meta-analysis of dose-response relation-
ships for hydrochlorothiazide, chlorthalidone, and bendroflumethiazide on blood pressure, 
serum potassium, and urate. Hypertension. 2012;59:1104–9.
 71. Pareek AK, Messerli FH, Chandurkar NB, Dharmadhikari SK, Godbole A V , Kshirsagar PP, 
et al. Efficacy of low-dose chlorthalidone and hydrochlorothiazide as assessed by 24-h ambu-
latory blood pressure monitoring. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67(4):379–89.40 Prehypertension: A Case in Favor of Early Use of Diuretics656
 72. Franse LV , Pahor M, Di Bari M, Somes GW, Cushman WC, Applegate WB. Hypokalemia 
associated with diuretic use and cardiovascular events in the systolic hypertension in the 
elderly program. Hypertension. 2000;35(5):1025–30.
 73. Zillich AJ, Garg J, Basu S, Bakris GL, Carter BL. Thiazide diuretics, potassium, and the devel-
opment of diabetes: a quantitative review. Hypertension. 2006;48(2):1–6.
 74. Guerrero P, Fuchs FD, Moreira LM, Martins VM, Bertoluci C, Fuchs SC, et al. Blood pressure- 
lowering efficacy of amiloride versus enalapril as add-on drugs in patients with uncontrolled 
blood pressure receiving hydrochlorothiazide. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2008;30(7):553–64.
 75. Brown MJ, Williams B, Morant SV , Webb DJ, Caulfield MJ, Cruickshank JK, et al. Effect 
of amiloride, or amiloride plus hydrochlorothiazide, versus hydrochlorothiazide on glucose 
tolerance and blood pressure (PATHWAY-3): a parallel-group, double-blind randomised phase 
4 trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2016;4(2):136–47.
 76. MRC Working Party. Medical Research Council trial of treatment of hypertension in older 
adults: principal results. Br Med J. 1992;304:405–12.
 77. Brown MJ, Palmer CR, Castaigne A, Leew PW, Mancia G, Rosenthal T, et  al. Morbidity 
and mortality in patients randomised to double-blind treatment with a long-acting calcium- 
channel blocker or diuretic in the International Nifedipine GITS study (INSIGHT). Lancet. 
2000;356(9227):366–72.
F. D. Fuchs and S. C. Fuchs657 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_41
P. Hamet ( *) · M. Haloui · J. Tremblay 
University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada
e-mail: pavel.hamet@umontreal.ca41Prehypertension in the Era 
of Personalized Medicine in 2017
Pavel Hamet, Mounsif Haloui, and Johanne Tremblay
41.1  Introduction
Still a recent history, but with enough hope, hype and rebound that we may ask 
ourselves where personalized medicine is going. It actually started at the dawn of 
Modern medicine with Hippocrates of Kos in fourth century BC when he stated, “It 
is more important to know who has the disease than to know which disease the per -
son has.” The subsequent evolution is called observational medicine with Avicenna 
and Claude Bernard to William Osler and many others cumulating in evidence 
based medicine started in last century by epidemiologists-methodologists such as 
David Sacket, Suzan and Robert Fletcher and Elvan Feinstein. This is still a gold 
standard in setting guidelines based mainly on large randomized clinical trials. 
Several weaknesses include selection bias and limited relevance to “real-life” situa-
tions. Simply stated, any treatments which are effective as a mean in 10,000 subjects 
without significant side effects can and should be approved and used in everybody, 
based on evidence from trials. Only rarely the notion of prevalence of responders in 
a given population has been considered. And we have only recently realized that 
most medications used to treat common chronic diseases such as type 2 diabetes, 
hypertension, osteoporosis, depression, and others are effective in only 40 to 60 
percent of subjects [1]. In current practice, we are adding successively different 
classes of medication until improvement or control without withdrawing the first or 
second drug that has no beneficial effect, resulting in high cost and potential unjusti-
fied side effects.658
41.2  Initial Strategies in Genomic Exploration
Initial genomic-based selection of drugs came from candidate gene approaches for 
pharmacodynamics or metabolizing genes for pharmacokinetics [2]. This approach 
is clearly limited in prediction, prevention and therapy of complex, polygenic traits 
and diseases such as blood pressure and so-called “essential” hypertension, while in 
monogenic forms of hypertension (Liddle syndrome, glucocorticoid remediable 
hypertension, etc.) drugs are usually both causally selected and clearly different 
from our common armamatum in hypertension.
Several strategies are now aimed at improving the selection of initial medication 
based on individual’s genomic profile, i.e., personalized health care [3]. This is now 
made possible by the complete sequencing of human genome and cataloging the list 
of millions of variants that exist between individuals, races and diseases and most 
importantly the capacity to detect on a single chip or array most of them being fre-
quent (more than 1%) or rare (less than 1%) in populations. Currently, mathematical 
process of imputation that takes into account linkage disequilibrium of up to ten 
million variants can be derived from single chip or array. This progress is followed 
by a rapid decrease in costs that recently resulted in an explosion of Genome-wide 
Association Study (GWAS) results in hundreds of diseases and conditions.
41.3  GWAS, Their Benefits and Limits
The current (as of June 15, 2017) GWAS catalogue includes a list of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNP) that are considered significantly associated at genome- wide 
(with p < 5 × 10−8) threshold with traits or diseases. For instance, 373 SNPs are associ-
ated with cardiovascular diseases and 487 are associated with cardiovascular traits; 
1182 SNPs are associated to immune system and 682 for nervous system, etc. [4 ]. For 
hypertension, the initial results were deceiving, when the early GWAS of Welcome 
Trust, that was successful in reporting many significant associations for several dis-
eases, claimed that no association could be observed for hypertension [5 ]. Careful 
reading of the methodology immediately pointed to an important problem: the pheno-
type, blood pressure was not recorded or not asked in subjects included in the “control 
sample” diluting any association gradient of such a frequent condition as hypertension 
with ~30% prevalence in general population. Only later, using carefully phenotyped 
cohorts and with over 120,000 subjects analyzed, 29 SNPs were found to be associ-
ated with hypertension [6 ]. More importantly, the SNPs that were associated with 
hypertension were also determining its main complications, such as stroke and coro-
nary artery disease, but somewhat surprisingly they were not associated with chronic 
kidney disease or albuminuria. Potential reasons for this will be discussed below.
GWAS represented a significant investment in funding but yielded an impressive 
amount of data that improved the understanding of complex diseases, at least for its 
genetic component. The whole field was and is still frequently criticized for its lack 
of resolution of a significant proportion of effect size of a phenotype, typically lim-
ited to 5–10% of the variance being explained by the sum of its genetic variants. 
P. Hamet et al.659
Furthermore, it is argued that “clinical traditional risk factors” account for a similar 
degree of phenotype variance. We argue that this is not surprising considering how 
it is approached: when LDL, blood pressure, BMI, and diabetes are used as risk fac-
tors, they may even outperform the genomic determinants, since their intrinsic 
genomic and environmental determinants are both included in the model. Thus, 
genomic contribution to hypertension is also included in BMI, insulin resistance, 
and dyslipidemia. We have recently reflected on the importance to position of the 
clinical utility of genomics in an Editorial comment “Missing heritability or need 
for reality check of clinical utility in genomic testing?” [7].
Our argument is that if genomic determinants have a predictive power as good as 
“traditional risk factors,” this is an important improvement, providing that the timing 
of genetic testing is correct since genomic determinants are present from conception, 
allowing for early detection even in pre-symptomatic phase, and prevention can be 
considered. For instance, about 40% of patients with T2D are at risk of developing 
diabetic nephropathy, yet there is no indication for use of medications such as angio-
tensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) in spite of their demonstrated ability to 
prevent the development of microalbuminuria in ADV ANCE [8 ] and BENEDICT 
[9]. Problem is that the capacity to prevent is not in itself an indication to administer 
medications such as ACEi to all T2D patients. However, if a genetic risk can detect, 
say, 75% risk probability, it should be easy to apply health economic criteria and 
demonstrate whether a test, followed by medication, is of value in preventing/retard-
ing a condition such as albuminuria, well demonstrated to be associated with cardio-
vascular mortality in a convincing set of over 600,000 subjects [10]. Moreover, it is 
conceivable that other conditions should be considered, since microalbuminuria may 
be present in prediabetes in context of metabolic syndrome and hyperuricemia [11].
It should be however expected that situation be rather complex for several rea-
sons. It is recognized that in polygenic disorders the impact of the vast majority of 
individual alleles is very small. Furthermore, their localization is generally outside of 
transcribed sequence, in intronic segments and often completely outside of genes, 
where they are expected to impact transcription via interactions with regulatory ele-
ments. The latter situation made the causality of gene more difficult to unravel and 
the former results in requirement of multiple genomic components to be considered 
simultaneously. Figure  41.1 from our unpublished initial genomic exploration of 
ADV ANCE trial (Hamet, Tremblay, ADV ANCE 2017 unpublished data, see meth-
ods [12]) illustrate that when comparing “cases” of combined macro- and microvas-
cular complications, which was the primary endpoint in ADV ANCE with “controls,” 
diabetic subjects from ADV ANCE, without any complication at baseline or during 
the trial, recruited simply for long duration of T2D or old age, more than one hundred 
alleles of such genes involved in systems such as immunity, inflammation, and car -
diovascular regulation are needed to separate cases from controls while respecting 
the direction of effect on risk and protection. It is apparent from this figure that while 
in the middle of the allelic distribution there is overlap between cases and controls, 
the first and last quarters can be clearly stratified into normal and risk groups.
An additional complication in allelic based prediction of outcomes is gene plei-
otropy and gene × gene as well as gene × environment interactions. A good example 41 Prehypertension in the Era of Personalized Medicine in 2017660
of the former is the uromodulin gene, well-studied gene in the pathogenesis of 
hypertension and kidney disease with frequent contradictory results. This gene is 
causally involved in an autosomal dominant form of disease of familial interstitial 
nephropathy, a rare genetic condition. Multiple mutations were described in affected 
families, all of them located in coding sequence leading to anomalies of gene prod-
uct secretion or function. Distinct is its impact on glomerular filtration rate and even 
microalbuminuria, with abnormal urinary quantity of uromodulin which is the most 
abundant protein of urine (call initially the Tamm and Horsfall’s mucoprotein) as a 
result of large set of SNPs, 95% of them being in noncoding regions of the gene as 
a part of polygenic determinants of glomerular filtration decline [13]. In this con-
text, the impact of associated SNPs is an order of magnitude more important for 
nephropathy in nondiabetic and in diabetic patients. Yet an additional implication of 
the same gene appears to be in pathogenesis of hypertension, potentially implicating 
uric acid and sodium reabsorption [14].
An example of how environment can significantly alter our capacity to evaluate 
gene implication in a disease comes from the analysis of the impact of the FTO 
gene. We have initially described several metabolic phenotypes (including triglyc-
eride levels, systolic and diastolic blood pressure and epinephrine levels cluster -
ing in a single locus on chromosome 16  in our set of 120 multigenerational 
founder families of French Canadians from North–East of Quebec, Canada [15, 
16]. This locus has been later described and confirmed by many GWAS to be one 
of the most significant locus for obesity, and its association modulated by exercise 
[17]. Surprisingly, we were the only group that observed also hypertension deter -
minants at that same locus [16]. Our further analyses revealed that the associa-
tions with systolic and diastolic blood pressures were significant only when and if 10
8
6
4Density
2
0
–0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
SVM predicted v alue after fit1.5 –0.5 0.0 0.51 .0
SVM predicted va lue after fit1.5 –0.50 .0 0.51 .0
SVM predicted va lue after fit1.510
8
6
4Density
2
010
8
6
4Density
2
028 SNPs 362 SNPs 3665 SNPsCases
ControlsCases
ControlsCases
ControlsPavel Hamet, Mounsif Haloui and Johanne Trembl ay
Prehypertension in the era of personalized medicine in 2017
Fig. 41.1 Relationship between number of SNPs and prediction of MACE (major adverse cardiac 
events)
P. Hamet et al.661
antihypertensive medication was withdrawn during a period of 4 weeks, as we did 
in our study. This is a seminal observation, as antihypertensive agents are almost 
never withdrawn particularly not in studies of obesity and thus the important asso-
ciation with hypertension was completely overlooked (see Fig. 2. in 18).
From this observation, it is clear that presence of medication, which modifies 
significantly the studied phenotype, as an “environment,” completely overshadows 
an existing genetic association.
41.4  AGE and SEX as Confounders
In most epidemiological studies, age and sex are considered significant covariates 
and results are usually appropriately adjusted for these confounders. Our studies in 
French-Canadian families demonstrated that in families with genetic predisposition 
to hypertension (increased familial prevalence comparatively to general popula-
tion), its penetrance is early compared to general population, i.e., genetic impact 
accelerates penetrance, while the environmental impact occurs later and is deter -
mined by life-long environmental exposure. The effect size of this is not negligible: 
in hypertensive families the probability of being hypertensive, if your siblings are, 
is twice than that of general population after the age of 50, but it is tenfold higher if 
you are less than 25 year old. This fact is particularly relevant for “prehypertension” 
in young subjects, as we can expect a much stronger genetic impact, easier to detect 
even before clinical symptoms.
Age can be also counterintuitively involved: a set of genes, which include CASZ 1 
gene (intronic rs880315), were demonstrated to be associated with the increase of 
blood pressure in young subjects (20–40 years old) and the same allele is associated 
with decrease of systolic blood pressure after age of 60 [19]. This age-dependent 
physiological impact modification is attributable to epigenetics, since CASH1 gene 
is an important target of epigenetic modulation [20]. Somewhat analogous situation 
is present when comparing micro- and macro-vascular outcomes in ADV ANCE trial. 
The incidence of macro-vascular events, MI, and stroke increases with age and dia-
betes duration, while the susceptibility to renal events is highest when diabetes is 
diagnosed before age of 50 and declines thereafter [21]. From those studies, it is 
evident that “adjustment for age,” assuming unidirectional increase of risk with 
advancing age may obscure the reality. These considerations are relevant when 
studying different ages, and separation by age strata may offer superior approach to 
simple “adjustment.”
Our studies in French-Canadian hypertensive families demonstrated age- and 
sex-specific loci. 25% of all loci were identified as age-specific and another 25% as 
sex-specific loci, i.e., not detectable when age or sex were adjusted. As an example 
we can mention a locus on chromosome 12 (rs575121) of which GG genotype is 
associated with highest blood pressure in man, while being associated with lowest 
blood pressure in women, though brothers and sisters within same families [22]. 
Winkler et al. [23] illustrated in a meta-analysis of over 300,000 subjects the impor -
tance of interactions of gene × sex × age effects where many loci of BMI were 
missed initially and revealed only by studying strata by age and sex separately.41 Prehypertension in the Era of Personalized Medicine in 2017662
41.5  Gene × Disease Interaction
The impact of the presence of disease “environment” may yet be another challenge 
in interpreting genomic determinants of an outcome. An example is the RAB38  
gene, demonstrated to be associated with albuminuria in diabetic but not in nondia-
betic patients carrying the same rs649529T allele (present in 45% of subjects) [24]. 
Our studies of CKDGen demonstrated that in experimental diabetes the knockout 
of this gene had no effect on blood pressure or glycemia or albuminuria. When 
diabetes was induced experimentally by injections of streptozotocin, diabetes 
appeared in both control and K/O animals and only animals without rab38 gene 
developed albuminuria within few weeks. It thus takes a gene defect and the pres-
ence of diabetes for phenotypic penetrance. We propose that the negative results of 
GWAS of hypertension may represent an analogous situation where renal impair -
ment needs another risk factor in addition to hypertension to reveal its genetic 
associations [6 ].
41.6  Impact of Geoethnicity
The differences among different racial groups in prevalence of cardiovascular com-
plications are well documented and recognized [25]. Thus, for instance renal impair -
ment and stoke are known to be more prevalent in Asians than in Caucasians and 
their genetic bases is usually underlined by different alleles. We have recently dem-
onstrated that differences in both phenotypic presentation and allelic structure are 
present between Caucasians of Balto-Slavic versus Germano-Celtic origins [12]. We 
have identified shared and distinct loci associated to age of onset of T2D in patients 
from these two geo-ethnic groups. PROX1/PROX1-AS1 genes (rs340841) has the 
highest effect size on age of onset of T2D. SNP rs340841 homozygous CC genotype 
is associated with 2 years earlier onset of T2D in Slavic patients living in either 
Slavic or Celtic countries. This locus is also associated with GFR decline in Slavic, 
with macroalbuminuria and hypertension in all ADV ANCE subjects of Caucasian 
origin and with Interleukin-6 levels at baseline. In a recent literature search, we found 
that PROX1 gene has been associated with abnormal glucose metabolism and risk of 
diabetes with variations depending on ethnicity. We concluded that fine granularity 
of distinction in geo-ethnic background assists in resolution of clinically relevant 
genetic contribution to cardiovascular complication in T2D.
41.7  Genetic Risk Scores (GRS) and Clinical Utility
Major challenge in recognition of clinical utility of personalized genomics is the 
widespread recognition of limited impact of individual alleles as discussed above. 
P. Hamet et al.663
Novel paradigm uses an algorithm that combines several alleles according to diverse 
models. Usually alleles are simply added into a genetic risk score (GRS), but 
improvement is often demonstrated when weighted for their effect size, or beta 
values. The difference in number of alleles incorporated into a GRS for a specific 
phenotype is compensated by correction for the number of alleles used. From initial 
5 to 10 allele reports, recent publications use poly-alleles, into so-called polyGRS 
with hundreds or even thousands of alleles. A major departure from dogma of sig-
nificance in genomics, following Bonferroni genome-wide significance of 5 × 10−8, 
is being recently replaced by inclusion of nominally significant SNPs, with same 
direction of risk, providing that this is resulting in improvement of C-statistic or 
even better net reclassification index. Initially, this approach was applied in explora-
tion of shared genomic impact for a phenotype. Thus, Holliday et al. [26] was able 
to demonstrate the relationship between kidney function and atherosclerotic stroke 
with polygenic GRS of decline of eGFR and increase of albumin/creatinine ratio 
sharing genomic determinants with specific types of stroke.
An important study from heath economic point of view was the exploration of 
statin administration as a function of genetic risk score of myocardial infarction. 
Using data from the largest statin trials, 27 genome-wide significant SNPs were 
included in a weighted GRS and subjects were stratified into low, intermediate, and 
high GRS groups of incident and recurrent coronary heart disease outcome catego-
ries. The study demonstrated a significant gradient in relative risk reduction from 
13, 29 to 48% in these categories and absolute risk reduction resulted in threefold 
gradient of number needed to treat (NNT) between categories [27]. The rationale for 
detecting this high risk category by GRS and not simply by cholesterol levels is thus 
open to exploration.
Another study of significant health economic impact is the much discussed rel-
evance of total prostatectomy. Prostate cancer is frequently neglected for its “benign 
outcomes,” yet it is the number one killer in males. Nora Pashayan [28] developed 
a GRS for prostate cancer and demonstrated the potential of its application: in low 
risk score category, 50% of interventions appeared unnecessary, but this number 
decreased to only 2% in patients with high GRS. Indeed, GRS require validation in 
additional cohorts, but with such potential, are clearly deserving attention.
Table 41.1 included here illustrates some examples of clinical utility of GRS and 
polyGRS.  Generally, AUC and impact on stratification (NRI) improved with 
increasing number of SNPs, yet we have observed in literature that the limit is 
phenotype-specific and related to biological relationship of genomic regions as well 
as requiring at least minimal evidence of phenotype/genotype association.
The future is to develop simple algorithms to execute and interpret polyGRS, test 
them prospectively for their clinical utility and assess their health economic value. 
We are not there yet, but we can say with confidence that when appropriately tar -
geted for time and disease, polyGRS are solid future values for treatment decisions 
with strong accent on prevention.41 Prehypertension in the Era of Personalized Medicine in 2017664Table 41.1 Examples of five studies evaluating the relationship between unweighted, weighted, and polygenetic risk scores and some cardiovascular out-
comes or traits which proved their clinical utility
Reference
(first author, 
year)aOutcome/TraitbSamplecSource of SNPs for 
GRSGRS (n of 
SNPs, 
Weights) Effect estimatedClinical utilityd
Läll et al., 
2017 [29]Incident T2D, 
CVD mortality, 
all-cause mortality1181 T2D cases
9092 controlsT2D, multiple 
sources [30]65, 600, 
2100, W
800, 1000, 
1400, dWFor GRS quintile 5 vs. 1
I-T2D, HR = 3.45 
(2.31–5.17)
For GRS quintile 5 vs. 1–4
I-T2D, HR = 1.95 
(1.52–2.51)
CVD mortality, HR = 1.27 
(1.10–1.64)
All-cause mortality, 
HR = 1.14 (1.02–1.27)ΔC index = 0.012 (p 
(LRT) = 2.01 × 10−11)
NRI for T2D = 0.324
Belsky 
et al., 2013 
[31]Obesity-related 
phenotypes, 
mortalityARIC study
10,745 participants
55% female
77% white
23% AABMI, obesity, weight, 
waist circumference, 
adiposity (16 sources) 
[31]32, uW, W White ARIC:
Obesity increase by 19.35% 
per uW-GRS SD (p < 10−18)
Obesity increase by 20.51% 
per W-GRS SD (p < 10−18)
AA ARIC:
Obesity increase by 3.54% 
per uW-GRS SD (p = 0.059)
Obesity increase by 4.92% 
per W-GRS SD (p = 0.017)
Mortality, HR = 1.12 
(1.04–1.15)White ARIC:
ΔAUC = 0.048 (0.031–
0.066), p<10−7
IDI = 0.006, 
p = 7.81 × 10−13
AA ARIC:
ΔAUC = 0.005 (0.005–
0.015), p = 0.30
IDI = 0.001, p = 0.055
P. Hamet et al.665Reference
(first author, 
year)aOutcome/TraitbSamplecSource of SNPs for 
GRSGRS (n of 
SNPs, 
Weights) Effect estimatedClinical utilityd
Ehret et al., 
2011 [6]Hypertension/SBP, 
DBP23,294 (women) SBP, DBP 29, W OR = 1.23 (1.19–1.28) per 
GRS SD
SBP: β = 1.65 (0.10) mmHg 
per GRS SD (p = 6.5 × 10−63)
DBP: β = 1.06 (0.07) mmHg 
per GRS SD (p = 8.4 × 10−57)
Hachiya 
et al., 2017 
[32]Incident ischemic 
stroke (I-IS)
Large-vessel 
disease (LVD), 
small-vessel 
disease (SVD), 
cardioembolic 
stroke (CE)3 sets from BioBank 
Japan project 
(derivative dataset, 
26,470 controls & 
13,214 IS) KyushuU 
& JPJM (predictive 
ability datasets, 1433 
controls & 1433 IS)IS, multiple sources 
(see supplementary 
Tables I & II from 
reference [32]5, W
12, 49, 565 
…537,999 
polyGRSFor WGRS quintile 5 vs. 1
KyushuU: I-IS, OR = 1.17 
(0.89–1.54) p = 0.313
JPJM: I-IS, OR = 1.45 
(0.87–2.42) p = 0.172
For PolyGRS quintile 5 vs. 1
KyushuU: I-IS, OR = 1.75 
(1.33–2.31) p < 0.001
JPJM: I-IS, OR = 1.99 
(1.19–3.33) p = 0.033
I-IS, OR = 1.17 (1.08–1.27) 
per PolyGRS SD, p < 0.001
For KyushuU, quintile 5 vs. 
1
LVD, OR = 1.26 (1.09–1.47) 
per PolyGRS SD, p = 0.002
SVD, OR = 1.18 (1.04–1.34) 
per PolyGRS SD, p = 0.012
CE, OR = 1.28 (1.00–1.62) 
per PolyGRS SD, p = 0.047For polyGRS, KyushuU,
IS: ΔCindex = 0.045, 
p = 0.007
NRI = 0.176 (0.095–
0.262), p < 0.001
IDI = 0.008 (0.004–0.012), 
p < 0.001
LVD: ΔCindex = 0.054, 
p = 0.066
NRI = 0.206 (0.060–
0.351), p = 0.006
IDI = 0.013 (0.004–0.021), 
p = 0.004
SVD: ΔCindex = 0.049, 
p = 0.044
NRI = 0.185 (0.060–
0.310), p = 0.003
IDI = 0.007 (0.002–0.012), 
p = 0.011
CE: Not significant
(continued)41 Prehypertension in the Era of Personalized Medicine in 2017666
Reference
(first author, 
year)aOutcome/TraitbSamplecSource of SNPs for 
GRSGRS (n of 
SNPs, 
Weights) Effect estimatedClinical utilityd
Van Setten 
et al., 2015 
[33]Coronary artery 
calcification2599 T2D [30], CAD/MI 
[34], LDL [35], TC 
[35], BMI [36]T2D: 55, W 
CAD/MI: 
8918, W
LDL: 58, W
TC: 72, W
BMI: 31, WPVE = 0.25% for GRS T2D 
(p = 4.0 × 10−2)
PVE = 1.50% for GRS CAD/MI  
(p = 1.6 × 10−11)
PVE = 0.25% for GRS LDL 
(p = 1.6 × 10−3)
PVE = 0.15% for GRS TC 
(p = 8.5 × 10−3)
PVE = 0.25% for GRS BMI 
(p = 2.6 × 10−2)
SNP single nucleotide polymorphism, GRS genetic risk score, W weighted, uW unweighted, dW double weighted, PolyGRS Poly genetic risk score, Δ change, 
LRT Likelihood ratio test, NRI net reclassification improvement index, SD standard deviation, AUC  area under the receiver-operator curve, IDI integrated dis-
crimination index, HR hazard ratio, CVD cardiovascular disease, I-T2D incident type 2 diabetes, BMI body mass index, SBP systolic blood pressure, DBP 
diastolic blood pressure, AA African American, JPJM Japan public health center and Japan multi-institutional collaborative cohort studies, KyushuU Kyushu 
university
aOnly selected GRS analyses are reported
bCardiovascular outcome or specific trait tested for association with GRS
cRefers to the sample used for evaluating the association between CVD outcome or trait and GRS
dThe adjustment variables are specific for each outcome/trait (see appropriate reference)Table 41.1 (contiued)
P. Hamet et al.667
Acknowledgments  The authors would like to acknowledge the participation of thousands of sub-
jects in their studies, their collaborations with colleagues from ADV ANCE trial, CKDGen 
Consortium and Clinpradia studies and financial help from public sources (Genome Quebec, 
CIHR, MESI) as well as private partners Les Laboratoires Servier and Servier Canada, Omnimed 
and Affymetrix, Medpharmgene Inc and OPTI-THERA Inc.
References
 1. Spear BB, Heath-Chiozzi M, Huff J. Clinical application of pharmacogenetics. Trends Mol 
Med. 2001;7(5):201–4.
 2. Motulsky AG, King MC. The great adventure of an American human geneticist. Annu Rev 
Genomics Hum Genet. 2016;17:1–15.
 3. Topol EJ. Individualized medicine from prewomb to tomb. Cell. 2014;157(1):241–53.
 4. Hindorff LA, MacArthur J, Morales J, Junkins HA, Hall PN, Klemm AK, Manolio TA. A 
catalog of published genome-wide association studies. http://www.genome.gov/gwastudies/. 
Accessed 15 June 2017.
 5. Burton PR, Clayton DG, Cardon LR, Craddock N, Deloukas P, Duncanson A, Kwiatkowski 
DP, McCarthy MI, Ouwehand WH, Samani NJ, Todd JA, Donnelly P, Barrett JC, Burton PR, 
Davison D, Donnelly P, Easton D, Evans D, Leung HT, Marchini JL, Morris AP, Spencer CC, 
Tobin MD, Cardon LR, Clayton DG, Attwood AP, Boorman JP, Cant B, Everson U, Hussey 
JM, Jolley JD, Knight AS, Koch K, Meech E, Nutland S, Prowse CV , Stevens HE, Taylor 
NC, Walters GR, Walker NM, Watkins NA, Winzer T, Todd JA, Ouwehand WH, Jones RW, 
McArdle WL, Ring SM, Strachan DP, Pembrey M, Breen G, St Clair D, Caesar S, Gordon- 
Smith K, Jones L, Fraser C, Green EK, Grozeva D, Hamshere ML, Holmans PA, Jones IR, 
Kirov G, Moskvina V , Nikolov I, O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ, Craddock N, Collier DA, Elkin 
A, Farmer A, Williamson R, McGuffin P, Young AH, Ferrier IN, Ball SG, Balmforth AJ, Barrett 
JH, Bishop DT, Iles MM, Maqbool A, Yuldasheva N, Hall AS, Braund PS, Burton PR, Dixon 
RJ, Mangino M, Suzanne S, Tobin MD, Thompson JR, Samani NJ, Bredin F, Tremelling M, 
Parkes M, Drummond H, Lees CW, Nimmo ER, Satsangi J, Fisher SA, Forbes A, Lewis CM, 
Onnie CM, Prescott NJ, Sanderson J, Mathew CG, Barbour J, Mohiuddin MK, Todhunter 
CE, Mansfield JC, Ahmad T, Cummings FR, Jewell DP, Webster J, Brown MJ, Clayton 
DG, Lathrop GM, Connell J, Dominczak A, Samani NJ, Marcano CA, Burke B, Dobson R, 
Gungadoo J, Lee KL, Munroe PB, Newhouse SJ, Onipinla A, Wallace C, Xue M, Caulfield M, 
Farrall M, Barton A, Bruce IN, Donovan H, Eyre S, Gilbert PD, Hider SL, Hinks AM, John SL, 
Potter C, Silman AJ, Symmmons DP, Thomson W, Worthington J, Clayton DG, Dunger DB, 
Nutland S, Stevens HE, Walker NM, Widmer B, Todd JA, Frayling TA, Freathy RM, Lango H, 
Perry JR, Shields BM, Weedon MN, Hattersley AT, Hitman GA, Walker M, Elliott KS, Groves 
CJ, Lindgren CM, Rayner NW, Timpson NJ, Zeggini E, McCarthy MI, Newport M, Sirugo G, 
Lyons E, Vannberg F, Hill A V , Bradbury LA, Farrar C, Pointon JJ, Wordsworth P, Brown MA, 
Franklyn JA, Heward JM, Simmonds MJ, Gough SC, Seal S, Stratton MR, Rahman N, Ban 
M, Goris A, Sawcer SJ, Compston A, Conway D, Jallow M, Newport M, Sirugo G, Rockett 
KA, Kwiatowski DP, Bumpstead SJ, Chaney A, Downes K, Ghori MJ, Gwilliam R, Hunt SE, 
Inouye M, Keniry A, King E, McGinnis R, Potter S, Ravindrarajah R, Whittaker P, Widden C, 
Withers D, Deloukas P, Leung HT, Nutland S, Stevens HE, Walker NM, Todd JA, Easton D, 
Clayton DG, Burton PR, Tobin MD, Barrett JC, Evans D, Morris AP, Cardon LR, Cardin NJ, 
Davison D, Ferreira T, Pereira-Gale J, Hallgrimsdottir IB, Howie BN, Marchini JL, Spencer 
CC, Su Z, Teo YY , Vukcevic D, Donnelly P, Bentley D, Brown MA, Gordon LR, Caulfield 
M, Clayton DG, Compston A, Craddock N, Deloukas P, Donnelly P, Farrall M, Gough SC, 
Hall AS, Hattersley AT, Hill A V , Kwiatkowski DP, Mathew C, McCarthy MI, Ouwehand 
WH, Parkes M, Pembrey M, Rahman N, Samani NJ, Stratton MR, Todd JA, Worthington 
J. Genome-wide association study of 14,000 cases of seven common diseases and 3,000 shared 
controls Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium. Nature. 2007;447(7145):661–78.
41 Prehypertension in the Era of Personalized Medicine in 2017668
 6. International Consortium for Blood Pressure Genome-Wide Association Studies, Ehret GB, 
Munroe PB, Rice KM, Bochud M, Johnson AD, Chasman DI, Smith A V , Tobin MD, Verwoert 
GC, Hwang SJ, Pihur V , V ollenweider P, O'Reilly PF, Amin N, Bragg-Gresham JL, Teumer 
A, Glazer NL, Launer L, Zhao JH, Aulchenko Y , Heath S, Sõber S, Parsa A, Luan J, Arora P, 
Dehghan A, Zhang F, Lucas G, Hicks AA, Jackson AU, Peden JF, Tanaka T, Wild SH, Rudan 
I, Igl W, Milaneschi Y , Parker AN, Fava C, Chambers JC, Fox ER, Kumari M, Go MJ, van der 
Harst P, Kao WH, Sjögren M, Vinay DG, Alexander M, Tabara Y , Shaw-Hawkins S, Whincup 
PH, Liu Y , Shi G, Kuusisto J, Tayo B, Seielstad M, Sim X, Nguyen KD, Lehtimäki T, Matullo 
G, Wu Y , Gaunt TR, Onland-Moret NC, Cooper MN, Platou CG, Org E, Hardy R, Dahgam S, 
Palmen J, Vitart V , Braund PS, Kuznetsova T, Uiterwaal CS, Adeyemo A, Palmas W, Campbell 
H, Ludwig B, Tomaszewski M, Tzoulaki I, Palmer ND, CARDIoGRAM Consortium, CKDGen 
Consortium, KidneyGen Consortium, EchoGen Consortium, CHARGE-HF Consortium, 
Aspelund T, Garcia M, Chang YP, O'Connell JR, Steinle NI, Grobbee DE, Arking DE, Kardia 
SL, Morrison AC, Hernandez D, Najjar S, McArdle WL, Hadley D, Brown MJ, Connell JM, 
Hingorani AD, Day IN, Lawlor DA, Beilby JP, Lawrence RW, Clarke R, Hopewell JC, Ongen 
H, Dreisbach AW, Li Y , Young JH, Bis JC, Kähönen M, Viikari J, Adair LS, Lee NR, Chen MH, 
Olden M, Pattaro C, Bolton JA, Köttgen A, Bergmann S, Mooser V , Chaturvedi N, Frayling 
TM, Islam M, Jafar TH, Erdmann J, Kulkarni SR, Bornstein SR, Grässler J, Groop L, V oight 
BF, Kettunen J, Howard P, Taylor A, Guarrera S, Ricceri F, Emilsson V , Plump A, Barroso I, 
Khaw KT, Weder AB, Hunt SC, Sun YV , Bergman RN, Collins FS, Bonnycastle LL, Scott 
LJ, Stringham HM, Peltonen L, Perola M, Vartiainen E, Brand SM, Staessen JA, Wang TJ, 
Burton PR, Soler Artigas M, Dong Y , Snieder H, Wang X, Zhu H, Lohman KK, Rudock ME, 
Heckbert SR, Smith NL, Wiggins KL, Doumatey A, Shriner D, Veldre G, Viigimaa M, Kinra 
S, Prabhakaran D, Tripathy V , Langefeld CD, Rosengren A, Thelle DS, Corsi AM, Singleton 
A, Forrester T, Hilton G, McKenzie CA, Salako T, Iwai N, Kita Y , Ogihara T, Ohkubo T, 
Okamura T, Ueshima H, Umemura S, Eyheramendy S, Meitinger T, Wichmann HE, Cho YS, 
Kim HL, Lee JY , Scott J, Sehmi JS, Zhang W, Hedblad B, Nilsson P, Smith GD, Wong A, 
Narisu N, Stančáková A, Raffel LJ, Yao J, Kathiresan S, O'Donnell CJ, Schwartz SM, Ikram 
MA, Longstreth WT Jr, Mosley TH, Seshadri S, Shrine NR, Wain LV , Morken MA, Swift AJ, 
Laitinen J, Prokopenko I, Zitting P, Cooper JA, Humphries SE, Danesh J, Rasheed A, Goel A, 
Hamsten A, Watkins H, Bakker SJ, van Gilst WH, Janipalli CS, Mani KR, Yajnik CS, Hofman 
A, Mattace-Raso FU, Oostra BA, Demirkan A, Isaacs A, Rivadeneira F, Lakatta EG, Orru M, 
Scuteri A, Ala-Korpela M, Kangas AJ, Lyytikäinen LP, Soininen P, Tukiainen T, Würtz P, Ong 
RT, Dörr M, Kroemer HK, Völker U, Völzke H, Galan P, Hercberg S, Lathrop M, Zelenika 
D, Deloukas P, Mangino M, Spector TD, Zhai G, Meschia JF, Nalls MA, Sharma P, Terzic J, 
Kumar MV , Denniff M, Zukowska-Szczechowska E, Wagenknecht LE, Fowkes FG, Charchar 
FJ, Schwarz PE, Hayward C, Guo X, Rotimi C, Bots ML, Brand E, Samani NJ, Polasek O, 
Talmud PJ, Nyberg F, Kuh D, Laan M, Hveem K, Palmer LJ, van der Schouw YT, Casas JP, 
Mohlke KL, Vineis P, Raitakari O, Ganesh SK, Wong TY , Tai ES, Cooper RS, Laakso M, Rao 
DC, Harris TB, Morris RW, Dominiczak AF, Kivimaki M, Marmot MG, Miki T, Saleheen D, 
Chandak GR, Coresh J, Navis G, Salomaa V , Han BG, Zhu X, Kooner JS, Melander O, Ridker 
PM, Bandinelli S, Gyllensten UB, Wright AF, Wilson JF, Ferrucci L, Farrall M, Tuomilehto 
J, Pramstaller PP, Elosua R, Soranzo N, Sijbrands EJ, Altshuler D, Loos RJ, Shuldiner AR, 
Gieger C, Meneton P, Uitterlinden AG, Wareham NJ, Gudnason V , Rotter JI, Rettig R, Uda M, 
Strachan DP, Witteman JC, Hartikainen AL, Beckmann JS, Boerwinkle E, Vasan RS, Boehnke 
M, Larson MG, Järvelin MR, Psaty BM, Abecasis GR, Chakravarti A, Elliott P, van Duijn CM, 
Newton-Cheh C, Levy D, Caulfield MJ, Johnson T. Genetic variants in novel pathways influ-
ence blood pressure and cardiovascular disease risk. Nature. 2011;478(7367):103–9.
 7. Hamet P. Missing heritability or need for reality check of clinical utility in genomic testing? J 
Hypertens. 2014;32(7):1395–6.
 8. de Galan BE, Perkovic V , Ninomiya T, Pillai A, Patel A, Cass A, Neal B, Poulter N, Harrap S, 
Mogensen CE, Cooper M, Marre M, Williams B, Hamet P, Mancia G, Woodward M, Glasziou 
P, Grobbee DE, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, ADV ANCE Collaborative Group. Lowering blood 
pressure reduces renal events in type 2 diabetes. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009;20(4):883–92.
P. Hamet et al.669
 9. Ruggenenti P, Perna A, Ganeva M, Ene-Iordache B, Remuzzi G, BENEDICT Study Group. 
Impact of blood pressure control and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor therapy on new- 
onset microalbuminuria in type 2 diabetes: a post hoc analysis of the BENEDICT trial. J Am 
Soc Nephrol. 2006;17(12):3472–81.
 10. Matsushita K, Coresh J, Sang Y , Chalmers J, Fox C, Guallar E, Jafar T, Jassal SK, Landman 
GW, Muntner P, Roderick P, Sairenchi T, Schöttker B, Shankar A, Shlipak M, Tonelli M, 
Townend J, van Zuilen A, Yamagishi K, Yamashita K, Gansevoort R, Sarnak M, Warnock DG, 
Woodward M, Ärnlöv J, CKD Prognosis Consortium. Estimated glomerular filtration rate and 
albuminuria for prediction of cardiovascular outcomes: a collaborative meta-analysis of indi-
vidual participant data. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2015;3(7):514–25.
 11. Krajcoviechova A, Tremblay J, Wohlfahrt P, Bruthans J, Tahir MR, Hamet P, Cifkova R. The 
impact of blood pressure and visceral adiposity on the association of serum uric acid with 
albuminuria. Am J Hypertens. 2016;29:1335–42.
 12. Hamet P, Haloui M, Harvey F, Marois-Blanchet FC, Sylvestre MP, Tahir MR, Simon PH, 
Kanzki BS, Raelson J, Long C, Chalmers J, Woodward M, Marre M, Harrap S, Tremblay 
J. PROX1 gene CC genotype as a major determinant of early onset of type 2 diabetes in Slavic 
participants from ADV ANCE study. J Hypertens. 2017;35(Suppl 1):S24–32.
 13. Gorski M, Tin A, Garnaas M, McMahon GM, Chu AY , Tayo BO, Pattaro C, Teumer A, 
Chasman DI, Chalmers J, Hamet P, Tremblay J, Woodward M, Aspelund T, Eiriksdottir G, 
Gudnason V , Harris TB, Launer LJ, Smith A V , Mitchell BD, O'Connell JR, Shuldiner AR, 
Coresh J, Li M, Freudenberger P, Hofer E, Schmidt H, Schmidt R, Holliday EG, Mitchell 
P, Wang JJ, de Boer IH, Li G, Siscovick DS, Kutalik Z, Corre T, V ollenweider P, Waeber G, 
Gupta J, Kanetsky PA, Hwang SJ, Olden M, Yang Q, de Andrade M, Atkinson EJ, Kardia SL, 
Turner ST, Stafford JM, Ding J, Liu Y , Barlassina C, Cusi D, Salvi E, Staessen JA, Ridker 
PM, Grallert H, Meisinger C, Müller-Nurasyid M, Krämer BK, Kramer H, Rosas SE, Nolte 
IM, Penninx BW, Snieder H, Fabiola Del Greco M, Franke A, Nöthlings U, Lieb W, Bakker 
SJ, Gansevoort RT, van der Harst P, Dehghan A, Franco OH, Hofman A, Rivadeneira F, 
Sedaghat S, Uitterlinden AG, Coassin S, Haun M, Kollerits B, Kronenberg F, Paulweber 
B, Aumann N, Endlich K, Pietzner M, Völker U, Rettig R, Chouraki V , Helmer C, Lambert 
JC, Metzger M, Stengel B, Lehtimäki T, Lyytikäinen LP, Raitakari O, Johnson A, Parsa A, 
Bochud M, Heid IM, Goessling W, Köttgen A, Kao WH, Fox CS, Böger CA. Genome-wide 
association study of kidney function decline in individuals of European descent. Kidney Int. 
2015;87(5):1017–29.
 14. Graham LA, Padmanabhan S, Fraser NJ, Kumar S, Bates JM, Raffi HS, Welsh P, Beattie W, 
Hao S, Leh S, Hultstrom M, Ferreri NR, Dominiczak AF, Graham D, McBride MW. Validation 
of uromodulin as a candidate gene for human essential hypertension. Hypertension. 
2014;63(3):551–8.
 15. Hamet P, Merlo E, Seda O, Broeckel U, Tremblay J, Kaldunski M, Gaudet D, Bouchard G, 
Deslauriers B, Gagnon F, Antoniol G, Pausová Z, Labuda M, Jomphe M, Gossard F, Tremblay 
G, Kirova R, Tonellato P, Orlov SN, Pintos J, Platko J, Hudson TJ, Rioux JD, Kotchen TA, 
Cowley AW Jr. Quantitative founder-effect analysis of French Canadian families identi-
fies specific loci contributing to metabolic phenotypes of hypertension. Am J Hum Genet. 
2005;76(5):815–32.
 16. Pausova Z, Syme C, Abrahamowicz M, Xiao Y , Leonard GT, Perron M, Richer L, Veillette S, 
Smith GD, Seda O, Tremblay J, Hamet P, Gaudet D, Paus T. A common variant of the FTO 
gene is associated with not only increased adiposity but also elevated blood pressure in French 
Canadians. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2009;2(3):260–9.
 17. Andreasen CH, Stender-Petersen KL, Mogensen MS, Torekov SS, Wegner L, Andersen G, 
Nielsen AL, Albrechtsen A, Borch-Johnsen K, Rasmussen SS, Clausen JO, Sandbaek A, 
Lauritzen T, Hansen L, Jørgensen T, Pedersen O, Hansen T.  Low physical activity accen-
tuates the effect of the FTO rs9939609 polymorphism on body fat accumulation. Diabetes. 
2008;57(1):95–101.
 18. Simon PH, Sylvestre MP, Tremblay J, Hamet P. Key considerations and methods in the study 
of gene-environment interactions. Am J Hypertens. 2016;29(8):891–9.
41 Prehypertension in the Era of Personalized Medicine in 2017670
 19. Simino J, Shi G, Bis JC, Chasman DI, Ehret GB, Gu X, Guo X, Hwang SJ, Sijbrands E, Smith 
A V , Verwoert GC, Bragg-Gresham JL, Cadby G, Chen P, Cheng CY , Corre T, de Boer RA, 
Goel A, Johnson T, Khor CC, LifeLines Cohort Study, Lluís-Ganella C, Luan J, Lyytikäinen 
LP, Nolte IM, Sim X, Sõber S, van der Most PJ, Verweij N, Zhao JH, Amin N, Boerwinkle E, 
Bouchard C, Dehghan A, Eiriksdottir G, Elosua R, Franco OH, Gieger C, Harris TB, Hercberg 
S, Hofman A, James AL, Johnson AD, Kähönen M, Khaw KT, Kutalik Z, Larson MG, Launer 
LJ, Li G, Liu J, Liu K, Morrison AC, Navis G, Ong RT, Papanicolau GJ, Penninx BW, Psaty 
BM, Raffel LJ, Raitakari OT, Rice K, Rivadeneira F, Rose LM, Sanna S, Scott RA, Siscovick 
DS, Stolk RP, Uitterlinden AG, Vaidya D, van der Klauw MM, Vasan RS, Vithana EN, Völker 
U, Völzke H, Watkins H, Young TL, Aung T, Bochud M, Farrall M, Hartman CA, Laan M, 
Lakatta EG, Lehtimäki T, Loos RJ, Lucas G, Meneton P, Palmer LJ, Rettig R, Snieder H, Tai 
ES, Teo YY , van der Harst P, Wareham NJ, Wijmenga C, Wong TY , Fornage M, Gudnason V , 
Levy D, Palmas W, Ridker PM, Rotter JI, van Duijn CM, Witteman JC, Chakravarti A, Rao 
DC. Gene-age interactions in blood pressure regulation: a large-scale investigation with the 
CHARGE, Global BPgen, and ICBP Consortia. Am J Hum Genet. 2014;95(1):24–38.
 20. Igarashi J, Muroi S, Kawashima H, Wang X, Shinojima Y , Kitamura E, Oinuma T, Nemoto N, 
Song F, Ghosh S, Held WA, Nagase H. Quantitative analysis of human tissue-specific differ -
ences in methylation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008;376(4):658–64.
 21. Zoungas S, Woodward M, Li Q, Cooper ME, Hamet P, Harrap S, Heller S, Marre M, Patel A, 
Poulter N, Williams B, Chalmers J, ADV ANCE Collaborative Group. Impact of age, age at 
diagnosis and duration of diabetes on the risk of macrovascular and microvascular complica-
tions and death in type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia. 2014;57(12):2465–74.
 22. Seda O, Tremblay J, Gaudet D, Brunelle PL, Gurau A, Merlo E, Pilote L, Orlov SN, Boulva 
F, Petrovich M, Kotchen TA, Cowley AW Jr, Hamet P. Systematic, genome-wide, sex-specific 
linkage of cardiovascular traits in French Canadians. Hypertension. 2008;51(4):1156–62.
 23. Winkler TW, Justice AE, Graff M, Barata L, Feitosa MF, Chu S, Czajkowski J, Esko T, Fall 
T, Kilpeläinen TO, Lu Y , Mägi R, Mihailov E, Pers TH, Rüeger S, Teumer A, Ehret GB, 
Ferreira T, Heard-Costa NL, Karjalainen J, Lagou V , Mahajan A, Neinast MD, Prokopenko I, 
Simino J, Teslovich TM, Jansen R, Westra HJ, White CC, Absher D, Ahluwalia TS, Ahmad 
S, Albrecht E, Alves AC, Bragg-Gresham JL, de Craen AJ, Bis JC, Bonnefond A, Boucher G, 
Cadby G, Cheng YC, Chiang CW, Delgado G, Demirkan A, Dueker N, Eklund N, Eiriksdottir 
G, Eriksson J, Feenstra B, Fischer K, Frau F, Galesloot TE, Geller F, Goel A, Gorski M, 
Grammer TB, Gustafsson S, Haitjema S, Hottenga JJ, Huffman JE, Jackson AU, Jacobs KB, 
Johansson Å, Kaakinen M, Kleber ME, Lahti J, Mateo Leach I, Lehne B, Liu Y , Lo KS, 
Lorentzon M, Luan J, Madden PA, Mangino M, McKnight B, Medina-Gomez C, Monda 
KL, Montasser ME, Müller G, Müller-Nurasyid M, Nolte IM, Panoutsopoulou K, Pascoe 
L, Paternoster L, Rayner NW, Renström F, Rizzi F, Rose LM, Ryan KA, Salo P, Sanna S, 
Scharnagl H, Shi J, Smith A V , Southam L, Stanč áková A, Steinthorsdottir V , Strawbridge 
RJ, Sung YJ, Tachmazidou I, Tanaka T, Thorleifsson G, Trompet S, Pervjakova N, Tyrer JP, 
Vandenput L, van der Laan SW, van der Velde N, van Setten J, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV , 
Verweij N, Vlachopoulou E, Waite LL, Wang SR, Wang Z, Wild SH, Willenborg C, Wilson 
JF, Wong A, Yang J, Yengo L, Yerges-Armstrong LM, Yu L, Zhang W, Zhao JH, Andersson 
EA, Bakker SJ, Baldassarre D, Banasik K, Barcella M, Barlassina C, Bellis C, Benaglio P, 
Blangero J, Blüher M, Bonnet F, Bonnycastle LL, Boyd HA, Bruinenberg M, Buchman AS, 
Campbell H, Chen YD, Chines PS, Claudi-Boehm S, Cole J, Collins FS, de Geus EJ, de Groot 
LC, Dimitriou M, Duan J, Enroth S, Eury E, Farmaki AE, Forouhi NG, Friedrich N, Gejman 
PV , Gigante B, Glorioso N, Go AS, Gottesman O, Gräßler J, Grallert H, Grarup N, Gu YM, 
Broer L, Ham AC, Hansen T, Harris TB, Hartman CA, Hassinen M, Hastie N, Hattersley AT, 
Heath AC, Henders AK, Hernandez D, Hillege H, Holmen O, Hovingh KG, Hui J, Husemoen 
LL, Hutri-Kähönen N, Hysi PG, Illig T, De Jager PL, Jalilzadeh S, Jørgensen T, Jukema JW, 
Juonala M, Kanoni S, Karaleftheri M, Khaw KT, Kinnunen L, Kittner SJ, Koenig W, Kolcic 
I, Kovacs P, Krarup NT, Kratzer W, Krüger J, Kuh D, Kumari M, Kyriakou T, Langenberg 
C, Lannfelt L, Lanzani C, Lotay V , Launer LJ, Leander K, Lindström J, Linneberg A, Liu 
YP, Lobbens S, Luben R, Lyssenko V , Männistö S, Magnusson PK, Mcardle WL, Menni C, 
P. Hamet et al.671
Merger S, Milani L, Montgomery GW, Morris AP, Narisu N, Nelis M, Ong KK, Palotie A, 
Pérusse L, Pichler I, Pilia MG, Pouta A, Rheinberger M, Ribel-Madsen R, Richards M, Rice 
KM, Rice TK, Rivolta C, Salomaa V , Sanders AR, Sarzynski MA, Scholtens S, Scott RA, Scott 
WR, Sebert S, Sengupta S, Sennblad B, Seufferlein T, Silveira A, Slagboom PE, Smit JH, 
Sparsø TH, Stirrups K, Stolk RP, Stringham HM, Swertz MA, Swift AJ, Syvänen AC, Tan ST, 
Thorand B, Tönjes A, Tremblay A, Tsafantakis E, van der Most PJ, Völker U, V ohl MC, V onk 
JM, Waldenberger M, Walker RW, Wennauer R, Widén E, Willemsen G, Wilsgaard T, Wright 
AF, Zillikens MC, van Dijk SC, van Schoor NM, Asselbergs FW, de Bakker PI, Beckmann 
JS, Beilby J, Bennett DA, Bergman RN, Bergmann S, Böger CA, Boehm BO, Boerwinkle E, 
Boomsma DI, Bornstein SR, Bottinger EP, Bouchard C, Chambers JC, Chanock SJ, Chasman 
DI, Cucca F, Cusi D, Dedoussis G, Erdmann J, Eriksson JG, Evans DA, de Faire U, Farrall 
M, Ferrucci L, Ford I, Franke L, Franks PW, Froguel P, Gansevoort RT, Gieger C, Grönberg 
H, Gudnason V , Gyllensten U, Hall P, Hamsten A, van der Harst P, Hayward C, Heliövaara 
M, Hengstenberg C, Hicks AA, Hingorani A, Hofman A, Hu F, Huikuri HV , Hveem K, James 
AL, Jordan JM, Jula A, Kähönen M, Kajantie E, Kathiresan S, Kiemeney LA, Kivimaki M, 
Knekt PB, Koistinen HA, Kooner JS, Koskinen S, Kuusisto J, Maerz W, Martin NG, Laakso 
M, Lakka TA, Lehtimäki T, Lettre G, Levinson DF, Lind L, Lokki ML, Mäntyselkä P, Melbye 
M, Metspalu A, Mitchell BD, Moll FL, Murray JC, Musk AW, Nieminen MS, Njølstad I, 
Ohlsson C, Oldehinkel AJ, Oostra BA, Palmer LJ, Pankow JS, Pasterkamp G, Pedersen NL, 
Pedersen O, Penninx BW, Perola M, Peters A, Polaš ek O, Pramstaller PP, Psaty BM, Qi L, 
Quertermous T, Raitakari OT, Rankinen T, Rauramaa R, Ridker PM, Rioux JD, Rivadeneira F, 
Rotter JI, Rudan I, den Ruijter HM, Saltevo J, Sattar N, Schunkert H, Schwarz PE, Shuldiner 
AR, Sinisalo J, Snieder H, Sørensen TI, Spector TD, Staessen JA, Stefania B, Thorsteinsdottir 
U, Stumvoll M, Tardif JC, Tremoli E, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden AG, Uusitupa M, Verbeek 
AL, Vermeulen SH, Viikari JS, Vitart V , Völzke H, V ollenweider P, Waeber G, Walker M, 
Wallaschofski H, Wareham NJ, Watkins H, Zeggini E, CHARGE Consortium, DIAGRAM 
Consortium, GLGC Consortium, Global-BPGen Consortium, ICBP Consortium, MAGIC 
Consortium, Chakravarti A, Clegg DJ, Cupples LA, Gordon-Larsen P, Jaquish CE, Rao DC, 
Abecasis GR, Assimes TL, Barroso I, Berndt SI, Boehnke M, Deloukas P, Fox CS, Groop 
LC, Hunter DJ, Ingelsson E, Kaplan RC, MI MC, Mohlke KL, O'Connell JR, Schlessinger 
D, Strachan DP, Stefansson K, van Duijn CM, Hirschhorn JN, Lindgren CM, Heid IM, North 
KE, Borecki IB, Kutalik Z, Loos RJ. The influence of age and sex on genetic associations 
with adult body size and shape: a large-scale genome-wide interaction study. PLoS Genet. 
2015;11(10):e1005378.
 24. Teumer A, Tin A, Sorice R, Gorski M, Yeo NC, Chu AY , Li M, Li Y , Mijatovic V , Ko YA, Taliun 
D, Luciani A, Chen MH, Yang Q, Foster MC, Olden M, Hiraki LT, Tayo BO, Fuchsberger 
C, Dieffenbach AK, Shuldiner AR, Smith A V , Zappa AM, Lupo A, Kollerits B, Ponte B, 
Stengel B, Krämer BK, Paulweber B, Mitchell BD, Hayward C, Helmer C, Meisinger C, 
Gieger C, Shaffer CM, Müller C, Langenberg C, Ackermann D, Siscovick D, DCCT/EDIC, 
Boerwinkle E, Kronenberg F, Ehret GB, Homuth G, Waeber G, Navis G, Gambaro G, Malerba 
G, Eiriksdottir G, Li G, Wichmann HE, Grallert H, Wallaschofski H, Völzke H, Brenner H, 
Kramer H, Mateo Leach I, Rudan I, Hillege HL, Beckmann JS, Lambert JC, Luan J, Zhao JH, 
Chalmers J, Coresh J, Denny JC, Butterbach K, Launer LJ, Ferrucci L, Kedenko L, Haun M, 
Metzger M, Woodward M, Hoffman MJ, Nauck M, Waldenberger M, Pruijm M, Bochud M, 
Rheinberger M, Verweij N, Wareham NJ, Endlich N, Soranzo N, Polasek O, van der Harst 
P, Pramstaller PP, V ollenweider P, Wild PS, Gansevoort RT, Rettig R, Biffar R, Carroll RJ, 
Katz R, Loos RJ, Hwang SJ, Coassin S, Bergmann S, Rosas SE, Stracke S, Harris TB, Corre 
T, Zeller T, Illig T, Aspelund T, Tanaka T, Lendeckel U, Völker U, Gudnason V , Chouraki V , 
Koenig W, Kutalik Z, O'Connell JR, Parsa A, Heid IM, Paterson AD, de Boer IH, Devuyst O, 
Lazar J, Endlich K, Susztak K, Tremblay J, Hamet P, Jacob HJ, Böger CA, Fox CS, Pattaro C, 
Köttgen A. Genome-wide association studies identify genetic loci associated with albuminuria 
in diabetes. Diabetes. 2016;65(3):803–17.
 25. Nadkarni GN, Horowitz CR. Genomics in CKD: is this the path forward? Adv Chronic Kidney 
Dis. 2016;23(2):120–4.
41 Prehypertension in the Era of Personalized Medicine in 2017672
 26. Holliday EG, Traylor M, Malik R, Bevan S, Maguire J, Koblar SA, Sturm J, Hankey GJ, 
Oldmeadow C, McEvoy M, Sudlow C, Rothwell PM, Coresh J, Hamet P, Tremblay J, Turner 
ST, de Andrade M, Rao M, Schmidt R, Crick PA, Robino A, Peralta CA, Jukema JW, Mitchell 
P, Rosas SE, Wang JJ, Scott RJ, Dichgans M, Mitchell BD, Kao WH, Fox CS, Levi C, Attia 
J, Markus HS, CKDGen Consortium and the International Stroke Genetics Consortium. 
Polygenic overlap between kidney function and large artery atherosclerotic stroke. Stroke. 
2014;45(12):3508–13.
 27. Mega JL, Stitziel NO, Smith JG, Chasman DI, Caulfield MJ, Devlin JJ, Nordio F, Hyde 
CL, Cannon CP, Sacks FM, Poulter NR, Sever PS, Ridker PM, Braunwald E, Melander 
O, Kathiresan S, Sabatine MS.  Genetic risk, coronary heart disease events, and the clini-
cal benefit of statin therapy: an analysis of primary and secondary prevention trials. Lancet. 
2015;385(9984):2264–71.
 28. Pashayan N, Duffy SW, Neal DE, Hamdy FC, Donovan JL, Martin RM, Harrington P, Benlloch 
S, Amin Al Olama A, Shah M, Kote-Jarai Z, Easton DF, Eeles R, Pharoah PD. Implications 
of polygenic risk-stratified screening for prostate cancer on overdiagnosis. Genet Med. 
2015;17(10):789–95.
 29. Läll K, Mägi R, Morris A, Metspalu A, Fischer K. Personalized risk prediction for type 2 dia-
betes: the potential of genetic risk scores. Genet Med. 2017;19(3):322–9.
 30. Morris AP, V oight BF, Teslovich TM, Ferreira T, Segrè A V , Steinthorsdottir V , Strawbridge 
RJ, Khan H, Grallert H, Mahajan A, Prokopenko I, Kang HM, Dina C, Esko T, Fraser RM, 
Kanoni S, Kumar A, Lagou V , Langenberg C, Luan J, Lindgren CM, Müller-Nurasyid 
M, Pechlivanis S, Rayner NW, Scott LJ, Wiltshire S, Yengo L, Kinnunen L, Rossin EJ, 
Raychaudhuri S, Johnson AD, Dimas AS, Loos RJ, Vedantam S, Chen H, Florez JC, Fox 
C, Liu CT, Rybin D, Couper DJ, Kao WH, Li M, Cornelis MC, Kraft P, Sun Q, van Dam 
RM, Stringham HM, Chines PS, Fischer K, Fontanillas P, Holmen OL, Hunt SE, Jackson 
AU, Kong A, Lawrence R, Meyer J, Perry JR, Platou CG, Potter S, Rehnberg E, Robertson 
N, Sivapalaratnam S, Stanč áková A, Stirrups K, Thorleifsson G, Tikkanen E, Wood AR, 
Almgren P, Atalay M, Benediktsson R, Bonnycastle LL, Burtt N, Carey J, Charpentier G, 
Crenshaw AT, Doney AS, Dorkhan M, Edkins S, Emilsson V , Eury E, Forsen T, Gertow K, 
Gigante B, Grant GB, Groves CJ, Guiducci C, Herder C, Hreidarsson AB, Hui J, James A, 
Jonsson A, Rathmann W, Klopp N, Kravic J, Krjutš kov K, Langford C, Leander K, Lindholm 
E, Lobbens S, Männistö S, Mirza G, Mühleisen TW, Musk B, Parkin M, Rallidis L, Saramies 
J, Sennblad B, Shah S, Sigurðsson G, Silveira A, Steinbach G, Thorand B, Trakalo J, Veglia 
F, Wennauer R, Winckler W, Zabaneh D, Campbell H, van Duijn C, Uitterlinden AG, Hofman 
A, Sijbrands E, Abecasis GR, Owen KR, Zeggini E, Trip MD, Forouhi NG, Syvänen AC, 
Eriksson JG, Peltonen L, Nöthen MM, Balkau B, Palmer CN, Lyssenko V , Tuomi T, Isomaa 
B, Hunter DJ, Qi L, Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium, Meta-Analyses of Glucose 
and Insulin-related traits Consortium (MAGIC) Investigators, Genetic Investigation of 
ANthropometric Traits (GIANT) Consortium, Asian Genetic Epidemiology Network–Type 
2 Diabetes (AGEN-T2D) Consortium, South Asian Type 2 Diabetes (SAT2D) Consortium, 
Shuldiner AR, Roden M, Barroso I, Wilsgaard T, Beilby J, Hovingh K, Price JF, Wilson 
JF, Rauramaa R, Lakka TA, Lind L, Dedoussis G, Njølstad I, Pedersen NL, Khaw KT, 
Wareham NJ, Keinanen-Kiukaanniemi SM, Saaristo TE, Korpi-Hyövälti E, Saltevo J, Laakso 
M, Kuusisto J, Metspalu A, Collins FS, Mohlke KL, Bergman RN, Tuomilehto J, Boehm 
BO, Gieger C, Hveem K, Cauchi S, Froguel P, Baldassarre D, Tremoli E, Humphries SE, 
Saleheen D, Danesh J, Ingelsson E, Ripatti S, Salomaa V , Erbel R, Jöckel KH, Moebus S, 
Peters A, Illig T, de Faire U, Hamsten A, Morris AD, Donnelly PJ, Frayling TM, Hattersley 
AT, Boerwinkle E, Melander O, Kathiresan S, Nilsson PM, Deloukas P, Thorsteinsdottir U, 
Groop LC, Stefansson K, Hu F, Pankow JS, Dupuis J, Meigs JB, Altshuler D, Boehnke M, 
McCarthy MI, DIAbetes Genetics Replication And Meta-analysis (DIAGRAM) Consortium. 
Large-scale association analysis provides insights into the genetic architecture and patho-
physiology of type 2 diabetes. Nat Genet. 2012;44(9):981–90.
 31. Belsky DW, Moffitt TE, Sugden K, Williams B, Houts R, McCarthy J, Caspi A. Development 
and evaluation of a genetic risk score for obesity. Biodemography Soc Biol. 2013;59(1):85–100.
P. Hamet et al.673
 32. Hachiya T, Kamatani Y , Takahashi A, Hata J, Furukawa R, Shiwa Y , Yamaji T, Hara M, Tanno 
K, Ohmomo H, Ono K, Takashima N, Matsuda K, Wakai K, Sawada N, Iwasaki M, Yamagishi 
K, Ago T, Ninomiya T, Fukushima A, Hozawa A, Minegishi N, Satoh M, Endo R, Sasaki 
M, Sakata K, Kobayashi S, Ogasawara K, Nakamura M, Hitomi J, Kita Y , Tanaka K, Iso H, 
Kitazono T, Kubo M, Tanaka H, Tsugane S, Kiyohara Y , Yamamoto M, Sobue K, Shimizu 
A. Genetic predisposition to ischemic stroke: a polygenic risk score. Stroke. 2017;48(2):253–8.
 33. van Setten J, Išgum I, Pechlivanis S, Tragante V , de Jong PA, Smolonska J, Platteel M, Hoffmann 
P, Oudkerk M, de Koning HJ, Nöthen MM, Moebus S, Erbel R, Jöckel KH, Viergever MA, 
Mali WP, de Bakker PI. Serum lipid levels, body mass index, and their role in coronary artery 
calcification: a polygenic analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015;8(2):327–33.
 34. CARDIoGRAMplusC4D Consortium, Deloukas P, Kanoni S, Willenborg C, Farrall M, 
Assimes TL, Thompson JR, Ingelsson E, Saleheen D, Erdmann J, Goldstein BA, Stirrups 
K, König IR, Cazier JB, Johansson A, Hall AS, Lee JY , Willer CJ, Chambers JC, Esko T, 
Folkersen L, Goel A, Grundberg E, Havulinna AS, Ho WK, Hopewell JC, Eriksson N, Kleber 
ME, Kristiansson K, Lundmark P, Lyytikäinen LP, Rafelt S, Shungin D, Strawbridge RJ, 
Thorleifsson G, Tikkanen E, Van Zuydam N, V oight BF, Waite LL, Zhang W, Ziegler A, Absher 
D, Altshuler D, Balmforth AJ, Barroso I, Braund PS, Burgdorf C, Claudi-Boehm S, Cox D, 
Dimitriou M, Do R, DIAGRAM Consortium, CARDIOGENICS Consortium, Doney AS, El 
Mokhtari N, Eriksson P, Fischer K, Fontanillas P, Franco-Cereceda A, Gigante B, Groop L, 
Gustafsson S, Hager J, Hallmans G, Han BG, Hunt SE, Kang HM, Illig T, Kessler T, Knowles 
JW, Kolovou G, Kuusisto J, Langenberg C, Langford C, Leander K, Lokki ML, Lundmark 
A, McCarthy MI, Meisinger C, Melander O, Mihailov E, Maouche S, Morris AD, Müller- 
Nurasyid M, MuTHER Consortium, Nikus K, Peden JF, Rayner NW, Rasheed A, Rosinger S, 
Rubin D, Rumpf MP, Schäfer A, Sivananthan M, Song C, Stewart AF, Tan ST, Thorgeirsson 
G, van der Schoot CE, Wagner PJ, Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium, Wells GA, 
Wild PS, Yang TP, Amouyel P, Arveiler D, Basart H, Boehnke M, Boerwinkle E, Brambilla 
P, Cambien F, Cupples AL, de Faire U, Dehghan A, Diemert P, Epstein SE, Evans A, Ferrario 
MM, Ferrières J, Gauguier D, Go AS, Goodall AH, Gudnason V , Hazen SL, Holm H, Iribarren 
C, Jang Y , Kähönen M, Kee F, Kim HS, Klopp N, Koenig W, Kratzer W, Kuulasmaa K, Laakso 
M, Laaksonen R, Lee JY , Lind L, Ouwehand WH, Parish S, Park JE, Pedersen NL, Peters A, 
Quertermous T, Rader DJ, Salomaa V , Schadt E, Shah SH, Sinisalo J, Stark K, Stefansson 
K, Trégouët DA, Virtamo J, Wallentin L, Wareham N, Zimmermann ME, Nieminen MS, 
Hengstenberg C, Sandhu MS, Pastinen T, Syvänen AC, Hovingh GK, Dedoussis G, Franks 
PW, Lehtimäki T, Metspalu A, Zalloua PA, Siegbahn A, Schreiber S, Ripatti S, Blankenberg 
SS, Perola M, Clarke R, Boehm BO, O'Donnell C, Reilly MP, März W, Collins R, Kathiresan 
S, Hamsten A, Kooner JS, Thorsteinsdottir U, Danesh J, Palmer CN, Roberts R, Watkins H, 
Schunkert H, Samani NJ. Large-scale association analysis identifies new risk loci for coronary 
artery disease. Nat Genet. 2013;45(1):25–33.
 35. Global Lipids Genetics Consortium, Willer CJ, Schmidt EM, Sengupta S, Peloso GM, 
Gustafsson S, Kanoni S, Ganna A, Chen J, Buchkovich ML, Mora S, Beckmann JS, Bragg- 
Gresham JL, Chang HY , Demirkan A, Den Hertog HM, Do R, Donnelly LA, Ehret GB, Esko T, 
Feitosa MF, Ferreira T, Fischer K, Fontanillas P, Fraser RM, Freitag DF, Gurdasani D, Heikkilä 
K, Hyppönen E, Isaacs A, Jackson AU, Johansson A, Johnson T, Kaakinen M, Kettunen J, 
Kleber ME, Li X, Luan J, Lyytikäinen LP, Magnusson PK, Mangino M, Mihailov E, Montasser 
ME, Müller-Nurasyid M, Nolte IM, O'Connell JR, Palmer CD, Perola M, Petersen AK, Sanna 
S, Saxena R, Service SK, Shah S, Shungin D, Sidore C, Song C, Strawbridge RJ, Surakka I, 
Tanaka T, Teslovich TM, Thorleifsson G, Van den Herik EG, V oight BF, V olcik KA, Waite LL, 
Wong A, Wu Y , Zhang W, Absher D, Asiki G, Barroso I, Been LF, Bolton JL, Bonnycastle LL, 
Brambilla P, Burnett MS, Cesana G, Dimitriou M, Doney AS, Döring A, Elliott P, Epstein SE, 
Eyjolfsson GI, Gigante B, Goodarzi MO, Grallert H, Gravito ML, Groves CJ, Hallmans G, 
Hartikainen AL, Hayward C, Hernandez D, Hicks AA, Holm H, Hung YJ, Illig T, Jones MR, 
Kaleebu P, Kastelein JJ, Khaw KT, Kim E, Klopp N, Komulainen P, Kumari M, Langenberg C, 
Lehtimäki T, Lin SY , Lindström J, Loos RJ, Mach F, McArdle WL, Meisinger C, Mitchell BD, 
Müller G, Nagaraja R, Narisu N, Nieminen TV , Nsubuga RN, Olafsson I, Ong KK, Palotie A, 
41 Prehypertension in the Era of Personalized Medicine in 2017674
Papamarkou T, Pomilla C, Pouta A, Rader DJ, Reilly MP, Ridker PM, Rivadeneira F, Rudan I, 
Ruokonen A, Samani N, Scharnagl H, Seeley J, Silander K, Stancáková A, Stirrups K, Swift 
AJ, Tiret L, Uitterlinden AG, van Pelt LJ, Vedantam S, Wainwright N, Wijmenga C, Wild SH, 
Willemsen G, Wilsgaard T, Wilson JF, Young EH, Zhao JH, Adair LS, Arveiler D, Assimes 
TL, Bandinelli S, Bennett F, Bochud M, Boehm BO, Boomsma DI, Borecki IB, Bornstein SR, 
Bovet P, Burnier M, Campbell H, Chakravarti A, Chambers JC, Chen YD, Collins FS, Cooper 
RS, Danesh J, Dedoussis G, de Faire U, Feranil AB, Ferrières J, Ferrucci L, Freimer NB, Gieger 
C, Groop LC, Gudnason V , Gyllensten U, Hamsten A, Harris TB, Hingorani A, Hirschhorn 
JN, Hofman A, Hovingh GK, Hsiung CA, Humphries SE, Hunt SC, Hveem K, Iribarren C, 
Järvelin MR, Jula A, Kähönen M, Kaprio J, Kesäniemi A, Kivimaki M, Kooner JS, Koudstaal 
PJ, Krauss RM, Kuh D, Kuusisto J, Kyvik KO, Laakso M, Lakka TA, Lind L, Lindgren CM, 
Martin NG, März W, McCarthy MI, McKenzie CA, Meneton P, Metspalu A, Moilanen L, 
Morris AD, Munroe PB, Njølstad I, Pedersen NL, Power C, Pramstaller PP, Price JF, Psaty 
BM, Quertermous T, Rauramaa R, Saleheen D, Salomaa V , Sanghera DK, Saramies J, Schwarz 
PE, Sheu WH, Shuldiner AR, Siegbahn A, Spector TD, Stefansson K, Strachan DP, Tayo BO, 
Tremoli E, Tuomilehto J, Uusitupa M, van Duijn CM, V ollenweider P, Wallentin L, Wareham 
NJ, Whitfield JB, Wolffenbuttel BH, Ordovas JM, Boerwinkle E, Palmer CN, Thorsteinsdottir 
U, Chasman DI, Rotter JI, Franks PW, Ripatti S, Cupples LA, Sandhu MS, Rich SS, Boehnke 
M, Deloukas P, Kathiresan S, Mohlke KL, Ingelsson E, Abecasis GR. Discovery and refine-
ment of loci associated with lipid levels. Nat Genet. 2013;45(11):1274–83.
 36. Speliotes EK, Willer CJ, Berndt SI, Monda KL, Thorleifsson G, Jackson AU, Lango Allen H, 
Lindgren CM, Luan J, Mägi R, Randall JC, Vedantam S, Winkler TW, Qi L, Workalemahu 
T, Heid IM, Steinthorsdottir V , Stringham HM, Weedon MN, Wheeler E, Wood AR, Ferreira 
T, Weyant RJ, Segrè A V , Estrada K, Liang L, Nemesh J, Park JH, Gustafsson S, Kilpeläinen 
TO, Yang J, Bouatia-Naji N, Esko T, Feitosa MF, Kutalik Z, Mangino M, Raychaudhuri S, 
Scherag A, Smith A V , Welch R, Zhao JH, Aben KK, Absher DM, Amin N, Dixon AL, Fisher 
E, Glazer NL, Goddard ME, Heard-Costa NL, Hoesel V , Hottenga JJ, Johansson A, Johnson 
T, Ketkar S, Lamina C, Li S, Moffatt MF, Myers RH, Narisu N, Perry JR, Peters MJ, Preuss 
M, Ripatti S, Rivadeneira F, Sandholt C, Scott LJ, Timpson NJ, Tyrer JP, van Wingerden S, 
Watanabe RM, White CC, Wiklund F, Barlassina C, Chasman DI, Cooper MN, Jansson JO, 
Lawrence RW, Pellikka N, Prokopenko I, Shi J, Thiering E, Alavere H, Alibrandi MT, Almgren 
P, Arnold AM, Aspelund T, Atwood LD, Balkau B, Balmforth AJ, Bennett AJ, Ben-Shlomo Y , 
Bergman RN, Bergmann S, Biebermann H, Blakemore AI, Boes T, Bonnycastle LL, Bornstein 
SR, Brown MJ, Buchanan TA, Busonero F, Campbell H, Cappuccio FP, Cavalcanti-Proença C, 
Chen YD, Chen CM, Chines PS, Clarke R, Coin L, Connell J, Day IN, den Heijer M, Duan J, 
Ebrahim S, Elliott P, Elosua R, Eiriksdottir G, Erdos MR, Eriksson JG, Facheris MF, Felix SB, 
Fischer- Posovszky P, Folsom AR, Friedrich N, Freimer NB, Fu M, Gaget S, Gejman PV , Geus 
EJ, Gieger C, Gjesing AP, Goel A, Goyette P, Grallert H, Grässler J, Greenawalt DM, Groves 
CJ, Gudnason V , Guiducci C, Hartikainen AL, Hassanali N, Hall AS, Havulinna AS, Hayward 
C, Heath AC, Hengstenberg C, Hicks AA, Hinney A, Hofman A, Homuth G, Hui J, Igl W, 
Iribarren C, Isomaa B, Jacobs KB, Jarick I, Jewell E, John U, Jørgensen T, Jousilahti P, Jula 
A, Kaakinen M, Kajantie E, Kaplan LM, Kathiresan S, Kettunen J, Kinnunen L, Knowles JW, 
Kolcic I, König IR, Koskinen S, Kovacs P, Kuusisto J, Kraft P, Kvaløy K, Laitinen J, Lantieri 
O, Lanzani C, Launer LJ, Lecoeur C, Lehtimäki T, Lettre G, Liu J, Lokki ML, Lorentzon M, 
Luben RN, Ludwig B, MAGIC, Manunta P, Marek D, Marre M, Martin NG, Mcardle WL, 
Mccarthy A, Mcknight B, Meitinger T, Melander O, Meyre D, Midthjell K, Montgomery GW, 
Morken MA, Morris AP, Mulic R, Ngwa JS, Nelis M, Neville MJ, Nyholt DR, O'Donnell 
CJ, O'Rahilly S, Ong KK, Oostra B, Paré G, Parker AN, Perola M, Pichler I, Pietiläinen KH, 
Platou CG, Polasek O, Pouta A, Rafelt S, Raitakari O, Rayner NW, Ridderstråle M, Rief 
W, Ruokonen A, Robertson NR, Rzehak P, Salomaa V , Sanders AR, Sandhu MS, Sanna S, 
Saramies J, Savolainen MJ, Scherag S, Schipf S, Schreiber S, Schunkert H, Silander K, Sinisalo 
J, Siscovick DS, Smit JH, Soranzo N, Sovio U, Stephens J, Surakka I, Swift AJ, Tammesoo 
ML, Tardif JC, Teder-Laving M, Teslovich TM, Thompson JR, Thomson B, Tönjes A, Tuomi 
T, van Meurs JB, van Ommen GJ, Vatin V , Viikari J, Visvikis-Siest S, Vitart V , V ogel CI, V oight 
P. Hamet et al.675
BF, Waite LL, Wallaschofski H, Walters GB, Widen E, Wiegand S, Wild SH, Willemsen G, 
Witte DR, Witteman JC, Xu J, Zhang Q, Zgaga L, Ziegler A, Zitting P, Beilby JP, Farooqi 
IS, Hebebrand J, Huikuri HV , James AL, Kähönen M, Levinson DF, Macciardi F, Nieminen 
MS, Ohlsson C, Palmer LJ, Ridker PM, Stumvoll M, Beckmann JS, Boeing H, Boerwinkle 
E, Boomsma DI, Caulfield MJ, Chanock SJ, Collins FS, Cupples LA, Smith GD, Erdmann J, 
Froguel P, Grönberg H, Gyllensten U, Hall P, Hansen T, Harris TB, Hattersley AT, Hayes RB, 
Heinrich J, Hu FB, Hveem K, Illig T, Jarvelin MR, Kaprio J, Karpe F, Khaw KT, Kiemeney 
LA, Krude H, Laakso M, Lawlor DA, Metspalu A, Munroe PB, Ouwehand WH, Pedersen 
O, Penninx BW, Peters A, Pramstaller PP, Quertermous T, Reinehr T, Rissanen A, Rudan I, 
Samani NJ, Schwarz PE, Shuldiner AR, Spector TD, Tuomilehto J, Uda M, Uitterlinden A, 
Valle TT, Wabitsch M, Waeber G, Wareham NJ, Watkins H, Procardis Consortium, Wilson 
JF, Wright AF, Zillikens MC, Chatterjee N, McCarroll SA, Purcell S, Schadt EE, Visscher 
PM, Assimes TL, Borecki IB, Deloukas P, Fox CS, Groop LC, Haritunians T, Hunter DJ, 
Kaplan RC, Mohlke KL, O'Connell JR, Peltonen L, Schlessinger D, Strachan DP, van Duijn 
CM, Wichmann HE, Frayling TM, Thorsteinsdottir U, Abecasis GR, Barroso I, Boehnke M, 
Stefansson K, North KE, MI MC, Hirschhorn JN, Ingelsson E, Loos RJ. Association analy-
ses of 249,796 individuals reveal 18 new loci associated with body mass index. Nat Genet. 
2010;42(11):937–48.
41 Prehypertension in the Era of Personalized Medicine in 2017677 © Springer International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2019
R. Zimlichman et al. (eds.), Prehypertension and Cardiometabolic Syndrome, 
Updates in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Protection, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-75310-2_42
J. Brguljan 
Division of Hypertension, Internal Department, University Medical Center Ljubljana, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
G. Ambrosio ( *) 
Division of Cardiology, University of Perugia School of Medicine, Perugia, Italy
e-mail: giuseppe.ambrosio@ospedale.perugia.it42Treatment of High-Normal Blood 
Pressure in the Guidelines
Jana Brguljan and Giuseppe Ambrosio
42.1  Introduction
Hypertension is the most important treatable risk factor in cardiovascular disease 
prevention. The number of people affected by hypertension has raised in all regions 
of the world from 2000 to 2015, reflecting not only the growing and ageing of global 
population, but also that more than 80% of the world is doomed to develop hyper -
tension. As a consequence of the predicted increase of about 10% in the global 
prevalence of hypertension, between 2000 and 2025 an estimated 560 million extra 
people will be affected by hypertension [1]. This prospect is daunting, given that in 
2010 high blood pressure was already the biggest single contributor to the global 
burden of disease and to worldwide mortality, leading to 9.4 million deaths each 
year [2].
The relation between cardiovascular outcome and blood pressure (BP) is log-
linear, without a critical level above which the risk sharply increases [3]. However, 
for the diagnosis and management of hypertension, clinicians need operational 
thresholds [4, 5]. Therefore, guidelines propose classification and treatment based 
on conventional, home, and ambulatory blood pressure measurements. In the world 
there exist differences among nations due to genetic and environment influence. 
This is why also differences exist in blood pressure definitions. The Joint National 
Committee on the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood 
Pressure (JNC8) [6], and the World Health Organization and the International 
Society of Hypertension (WHO-ISH) [4] proposed a classification of blood pressure 678
based on conventional measurement into normal, prehypertensive, and hypertensive 
levels. The estimate prevalence of prehypertensive in a general population varies 
from 31% [7] to 33% [8].
The definition of “high-normal” blood pressure is shared by ESC/ESH [9] and 
Canadian Hypertension guidelines [10], all based on office blood pressure measure-
ment defining optimal, normal, high-normal, and hypertension in ESC/ESH 2013 
guidelines.
42.2  Choice of Thresholds
In 2003, the USA Joint National Committee Guidelines (JNC7) on hypertension 
decided to unify normal and high-normal blood pressure categories into a single 
entity termed ‘prehypertension’. This was based on evidence from the Framingham 
study that in such individuals the chance of developing hypertension is higher than 
in those with a blood pressure < 120/80 mmHg (termed ‘normal’ blood pressure) at 
all ages. In the 1997 categories were optimal, normal, high-normal, and hyperten-
sion stages 1, 2, and 3.
In contrast, the ESH/ESC Committee has decided not to use this terminology for 
the following reasons: (1) even in the Framingham study the risk of developing hyper -
tension was definitely higher in subjects with high-normal (130–139/85–89 mmHg) 
than in those with normal blood pressure (120–129/80–84 mmHg) and therefore there 
is little reason to combine the two groups together; (2) given the ominous significance 
of the word hypertension for the laypeople, the term ‘prehypertension’ may create 
anxiety and request for unnecessary medical support and examinations in many sub-
jects; (3) most importantly, although lifestyle changes recommended by the 2003 
JNC7 Guidelines for all prehypertensive individuals may be a valuable population 
strategy, in practice this category is a highly differentiated one, with the extremes 
consisting of subjects in no need of any intervention (e.g. an elderly individual with a 
blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg) as opposed to subjects with a high or very high-risk 
profile (e.g. after stroke or with diabetes) in whom drug treatment is required [11]. 
There were no additional evidences from randomized clinical trials to change this 
statement also in guidelines published in 2013, except for starting point of medical 
treatment. The same classification is used for all adults, whereas different criteria, 
based on percentiles, are adopted for children and adolescents [12].
Canada is a country with the greatest achievement of controlled blood pressure. 
In their new 2017 guidelines giving guideless for hypertension patient treatment, 
they used also automatic unattended (i.e. non-observed AOBP) blood pressure tech-
nique, but high-normal blood pressure was defined only based on non-AOBP. When 
using non-AOBP, a mean SBP 140 mm Hg or DBP 90 mm Hg is high, and an SBP 
between 130 and 139 mm Hg and/or a DBP between 85 and 89 mm Hg is high-
normal [10].
Limits of high-normal blood pressure are only defined based upon office blood 
pressure measurements, whereas limits for high-normal blood pressure when using 
home or ambulatory techniques are not defined.
J. Brguljan and G. Ambrosio679
42.3  Definition in Different Guidelines
GuidelinesDefinition 
(OBPM) SBP/DBP (mmHg)
ESH/ESC 2013 [9] High-normal BP 130–139 and/or 
85–89
2014 Report From the Panel Members Appointed to 
the Eighth Joint National Committee (JNC 8) [13]Prehypertension 120–139 and/or 
80–89
Hypertension Canada’s Guidelines 2017 [10] High-normal BP 130–139 and/or 
85–89
42.4  Size of the Problem
There are few facts which confirm the important role of high-normal blood pressure 
or prehypertension and stage 1 hypertension, because they are the forms of high 
blood pressure that contribute most to mortality. Based on cardiovascular mortality 
data for 164,685 men with prehypertension and hypertension, fully 79% of deaths 
over a 15-year period were among men with systolic blood pressure that showed 
either prehypertension or stage 1 (140–159 mm Hg) hypertension [14, 15].
In the Framingham Study [16] the 4-year progression rate from prehypertension 
to hypertension was 37% in subjects below age 65 years, and 50% in older partici-
pants. In a European Flemish population study, the progression rates over 10 years’ 
follow-up were 25% in persons below 50 years and 50% in those aged 50 years or 
older [17]. Looking from the population perspective we can see that prehyperten-
sion is a precursor of hypertension.
Besides, prehypertension is associated with numerous abnormalities that increase 
cardiovascular risk independent of BP. Based on the TECUMSEH BP Study, for 
example, Dr. Julius and colleagues reported that individuals with borderline hyper -
tension were significantly more likely to have high total cholesterol, low HDL, 
higher levels of triglycerides, insulin, and glucose, and to weight more (all p < 0.001 
versus normotensive study participants) [18]. Furthermore, an association of prehy-
pertension with other cardiovascular risk factors has been established [19].
It was pointed out that the term prehypertension was coined in 1939 in the con-
text of earlier studies that linked high blood pressure recorded during physical 
examination for life insurance proposes to subsequent morbidity and mortality. 
These individuals had an increased risk of hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and 
early death from cardiovascular causes [20].
In a trial of subjects with high-normal BP, 40% of subjects in the placebo arm 
developed hypertension within 2 years and 63% within 4 years [21]. This is consis-
tent with observational data, indicating that these individuals exhibit higher four-
year rates of progression to overt hypertension [16]. In addition, the 10-year risk of 
incident cardiovascular disease was greater in both men (hazard ratio 1.6; 95% CI 
1.1 to 2.3) and women (hazard ratio 1.8; 95% CI 1.0 to 3.1) with high-normal BP 
than in subjects with BP levels lower than 120/80 mm Hg [22]. Those older than 
65 years of age with high-normal BP levels had the highest risk of progression to 42 Treatment of High-Normal Blood Pressure in the Guidelines680
hypertension and development of cardiovascular disease. In this group, the crude 
incidence rate of cardiovascular events per 1000 patient years was 20 in women and 
28 in men. These data indicate that patients with high-normal blood pressure have: 
(a) a higher risk of progression to overt hypertension and (b) worse prognosis than 
patients with optimal blood pressure levels. Therefore, although antihypertensive 
therapy is not recommended, close surveillance in the form of annual blood pres-
sure checks is recommended [10].
Prehypertension and masked hypertension carry a great risk of developing hyper -
tension. In the Flemish Study on Environment, Genes and Health Outcomes 
(FLEMENGHO) [17], the 4-year progression rates from prehypertension to hyper -
tension were 17.9 and 26.3% in participants younger than 50 years or older, respec-
tively. In the Copenhagen Monitoring of Trends and Determinants in Cardiovascular 
Disease [23], the progression rate over 10  years was 37.3%. By multivariable-
adjusted analysis, progression to prehypertension or to hypertension was associated 
with 10-year cardiovascular risks of 11.1% and 13.9%, respectively.
42.5  Importance of Blood Pressure Measurements 
and Masked Hypertension
Blood pressure changes with time and conditions of measurement. Estimation of CV 
risk is largely based on conventional office blood pressure. Until quite recently the 
diagnosis of hypertension relied entirely on clinic blood pressure measurement. 
Accumulating evidence favours measuring blood pressure with 24  h ambulatory 
blood pressure (ABPM), or if not possible with home blood pressure monitoring 
[24]. In some people, BP is abnormally elevated when measured at doctor’s office. 
This is called “white-coat” hypertension. Opposite to white-coat hypertension, in 
some people BP is elevated when measured outside not inside the clinic, and this is 
called masked hypertension. In several observational studies it was confirmed that 
people with masked hypertension are at higher cardiovascular risk and people with 
white-coat hypertension should not be treated for hypertension [25]. These phenom-
ena were also observed in people within the high-normal blood pressure group or 
prehypertension. At subject-level data IDACO meta-analysis included 7826 people 
randomly recruited from 11 populations, not treated with blood pressure-lowering 
drugs and covered on average over 11.3  years of follow-up. Using the daytime 
ABPM in our current study out of the office blood pressure revealed masked hyper -
tension in 29.3% of participants with prehypertension. Compared to normotensive 
group, where only about 7% of people had masked hypertension, about 29% have 
masked hypertension in prehypertension group. These subjects were at a 2 times 
higher risk of developing a cardiovascular event and 3 times higher to developing 
stroke than those within the real prehypertensive group, and thus need to be treated, 
but with the usually used clinical blood pressure measurement technique they would 
be overlooked and exposed to the risk of experiencing an early cardiovascular event. 
Diabetic patients, smokers, alcohol consumers, men, and individuals with increased 
cholesterol (≥ 5.7 mmol/L) are at increased risk of having masked hypertension [26].
J. Brguljan and G. Ambrosio681
Manios and co-workers [27] enrolled 807 referred patients, whose office blood 
pressure was less than 140 mm Hg systolic and 90 mm Hg diastolic. Prevalence of 
pure prehypertension and prehypertension with masked hypertension was 59.9% 
and 19.7%, respectively. After adjustments, prehypertensive patients with masked 
hypertension had higher (P < 0.01) carotid intima-media thickness than either pre-
hypertensive patients without masked hypertension or normotensive subjects (712 
vs. 649 vs. 655  μm). Shimbo and colleagues [28] studied 813 untreated participants 
recruited from a worksite-based population, from whom they obtained 9 blood pres-
sure readings (3 at each of 3 visits over 3  weeks). Among 482 normotensive 
(<120/<80 mm Hg) and 287 prehypertensive (120–139/80–85 mm Hg) participants, 
the prevalence of masked hypertension was 3.9% and 34.1%, respectively. By mul-
tivariable-adjusted models, participants with prehypertension or masked hyperten-
sion (awake blood pressure  ≥ 135/≥85 mm Hg) had a greater left ventricular mass 
index than those with normotension (60.8 vs. 64.2 g/m2; P < 0.01), but left ventricu-
lar mass index was not different among prehypertensive participants without and 
with masked hypertension (66.1 vs. 68.6 g/m2; P = 0.19).
42.6  Could Development of Hypertension Be Prevented?
Two randomized clinical trials explored whether antihypertensive drug treatment 
can prevent progression from prehypertension to hypertension. In TROPHY (Trial 
of Preventing Hypertension) [21], prehypertensive participants (130–139/85–
89  mm Hg) were randomly assigned to be treated for 2  years with candesartan 
(n = 391) or placebo (n = 381), followed by 2 years on placebo for all (n = 772). 
During the first 2 years, hypertension developed in 154 participants in the placebo 
group and 53 in the candesartan group (relative risk reduction [RRR], 66%; CI, 
56–75%; P < 0.001). After 4 years, hypertension (office blood pressure, 140/90 mm 
Hg) had developed in 240 and 208 participants in the placebo and candesartan 
group, respectively (RRR, 16%; CI, P < 0.007). However, the proportion of partici-
pants requiring antihypertensive drug treatment during follow-up (placebo vs. can-
desartan, 12.6 vs. 11.5%; RRR, 0.91; CI, 0.62–1.34), or having hypertension at 
4 years (1.3 vs. 1.5%; RRR, 1.17; CI, 0.36–3.80), was similar in both groups.
In PHARAO (Prevention of Hypertension with the Angiotensin-Converting 
Enzyme Inhibitor Ramipril in Patients with High-Normal Blood) [29], 1008 sub-
jects with high-normal blood pressure (130–139/85–89 mm Hg) were randomized 
to ramipril 5 mg daily or placebo. Over 3 years of follow-up, the RRR for the inci-
dence of hypertension was 34% (CI, 19–47%; P = 0.0001). Ramipril also proved to 
be more effective in reducing the incidence of manifest office hypertension in 
patients with baseline daytime ambulatory blood pressure within the high-normal 
range (125–134/80–84 mm Hg). The incidence of cerebrovascular and cardiovascu-
lar events showed no statistically significant differences between the two groups.
Clinicians should also think beyond BP therapy for patients with high-normal 
BP. Since prehypertension usually occurs in the presence of one or more other major 
risk factors, Jan Östergren, MD, PhD, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm 42 Treatment of High-Normal Blood Pressure in the Guidelines682
(Sweden), recommends combining effective BP and dyslipidemia therapy. The addi-
tive effect of cholesterol and BP has been known since at least the 1992 publication of 
data from MRFIT [15] and the additional risk associated with multiple risk factors is 
recognized in the 2007 update of the ESH guidelines for treating hypertension [30].
Evidence certainly suggests that optimal risk reduction is achieved when both 
BP and cholesterol are targeted, benefits being more than just additive. Recent stud-
ies suggest a synergy between statin therapy and antihypertensive therapy, such as 
the ASCOT trial reported by Dr. Östergren and colleagues. Given the evidence, Dr. 
Östergren said, the polypill concept could increase compliance and efficacy of 
treatment.
Finally, based on the vascular protective actions of renin-angiotensin system 
blockade, Prof. Thomas Unger, Chair of Pharmacology and Director of the Institute 
of Pharmacology at the Charité—Universitätsmedizin Berlin (Germany), recom-
mends considering these agents in patients with prehypertension and multiple risk 
factors [31].
42.7  Importance of the Overall Risk Profile
In 2007 ESH/ESC guidelines it was suggested to initiate drug treatment in high-
normal blood pressure range in high-risk patient having diabetes, renal diseases, or 
concomitant CV diseases. However, it was pointed out in 2009 that evidences are 
scanty. For diabetes recommendations is based on results of the ‘normotensive’ 
component of the ABCD trial [32], which however has important limitations: ‘nor -
motension’ was defined as a SBP less than 160 mmHg, the trial size was small, the 
primary endpoint was the change in creatinine clearance (with no statistically sig-
nificant difference between treatments), and a statistically significant reduction of 
cardiovascular events in the group randomized to more intensive treatment was lim-
ited to the incidence of stroke but did not extend to other cardiovascular events. 
Recommendations also derive from subgroup analyses of two other large trials, like 
MICROHOPE [33] and ADV ANCE [34]. However, in MICROHOPE, normoten-
sion was defined by history, entry BP values were not mentioned, and the statistical 
significance of cardiovascular event reduction in the ‘normotensive group’ was not 
reported; in ADV ANCE, the benefit of antihypertensive treatment was significant in 
patients with an entry SBP 140 mmHg or more, but not in those in whom it was 
below this value. Similar findings were obtained when stratification was based on 
the presence or absence of a history of hypertension.
Lowering blood pressure always shows beneficial effect on stroke. In PROGRESS 
trial, in patients with a previous stroke or transient ischemic attack BP, lowering was 
accompanied by a marked reduction in the incidence of recurrent stroke and cardio-
vascular events in both hypertensive and normotensive patients. However, in that 
study, hypertension was defined by SBP values of 160 mmHg or more, and in a 
subsequent analysis, a significant reduction in recurrent stroke with treatment was 
only observed when entry SBP was 140 mmHg or more [90]. Furthermore, entry 
BP values in PROGRESS were reported irrespective of background treatment 
J. Brguljan and G. Ambrosio683
present in 50% of patients [35, 36], and therefore they cannot be used to take deci-
sions on initiation of treatment in untreated patients. In PATS study [37], where 
reduction of CV events was shown in patients with previous stroke, only 16% of 
normotensive were included.
In most of trials with coronary artery disease randomized drugs were added on a 
background of antihypertensive drugs, therefore we cannot define them as normo-
tensive [38]. Same consideration applies to recent large meta-analyses showing the 
benefits of BP-lowering therapy also in individuals with baseline SBP above and 
below 140 mmHg, since the great majority of the individuals had been involved in 
trials in which antihypertensive agents were present at baseline [9].
Even though TROPHY and PHARAO study have shown that administration of 
antihypertensive drugs can slower the progression of hypertension, it is not clear 
how far this benefit goes, whether it lasts and really delays events, and if it is 
cost-effective.
Based on all these data, the last 2013 ESH/ESC [9] guidelines state that unless 
necessary evidence is obtained it is not recommended to initiate antihypertensive 
drug therapy at high-normal blood pressure. It is strongly recommended to undergo 
lifestyle changes.
42.8  Phenotype of People with High-Normal Blood Pressure 
(Adolescents, Pregnant Women)
Discussing about group of people in high-normal blood pressure range we would 
certainly need to distinguish between different phenotype groups, because predica-
tion, development, and consequence of hypertension would not be the same consid-
ering adolescent or an elderly person. We shall follow up adolescents really closely 
to prevent the consequences on target organ damage and progression to hyperten-
sion [39]. With respect to pregnant women, there is no definition of high-normal 
blood pressure in this group.
42.9  Recommended Treatment
Guidelines are usually production of group of specialists and reviewers who among 
recognized and published studies suggest diagnostic and therapeutic aspects of 
hypertension.
In all of the guidelines, regardless of how these category of population are 
defined, only lifestyle changes are recommended. In our daily practice we can see 
that instructions to these recommendations are hard to follow, and even more to 
retain, yet they can still be very effective.
One of the most effective one is weight reduction. In a meta-analysis by Neter 
et al. twenty-five randomized, controlled trials were included, with a total of 4874 
participants. A net weight reduction of − 5.1 kg (95% confidence interval [CI], − 6.03 
to −4.25) by means of caloric restriction, increased physical activity, or both, reduced 42 Treatment of High-Normal Blood Pressure in the Guidelines684
systolic blood pressure by − 4.44 mm Hg (95% CI, − 5.93 to − 2.95) and diastolic 
blood pressure by − 3.57 mm Hg (95% CI, − 4.88 to − 2.25). Blood pressure reduc-
tions were − 1.05 mm Hg (95% CI, − 1.43 to − 0.66) systolic and − 0.92 mm Hg (95% 
CI, −1.28 to − 0.55) diastolic when expressed per kilogram of weight loss [40].
Subsequent meta-analyses in patients with hypertension confirmed the blood 
pressure-lowering effect of weight reduction by weight reducing diet, in compari-
son with control. Weighted mean differences in weight and systolic/diastolic blood 
pressure: −4.1 kg; −6.3/−3.4 mmHg [41] and −4.0 kg; −4.5/−3.2 mmHg in the one 
described by Siebenhofer et al. [42].
Effective weight loss will only go coupled with increased regular exercise. We 
can distinguish between dynamic aerobic endurance training, which involves large 
muscle groups in dynamic activities, designed specifically to increase aerobic 
endurance performance, and resistance training, which involves strength, weight, 
static and/or isometric training, designed specifically to increase muscular strength, 
power and/or endurance. In meta-analyses done by Cornelissen and Fagard 71 stud-
ies were included, ~57% men, age median 47 years; range 21–83 years. Dynamic 
aerobic endurance training decreased resting systolic and diastolic blood pressure 
by −3.0 and −2.4 and daytime ambulatory systolic and diastolic by −3.3 and 
−3.5 mmHg [43]. Aerobic interval training has also been shown to reduce BP [44].
Impact of resistance training on blood pressure and other cardiovascular risk 
factors in a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials analysing 1012 subjects 
resulted in −3.5 and −3.2 change in systolic and diastolic BP [45]. Dynamic resis-
tance training was followed by significant BP reduction, as well as improvement in 
other metabolic parameters, and performance of resistance exercises on 2–3 days 
per week can be advised. Isometric exercises are not recommended, since data from 
only a few studies are available. People should be advised to participate in at least 
30 min of moderate-intensity dynamic aerobic exercise (walking, jogging, cycling, 
or swimming) on 5–7 days per week [46].
Third recommended point is salt restriction. There are doubts about actual posi-
tive effect of this measure, but it is known overall that average intake of salt in popu-
lation is too high, and the truth is that not all the people are salt-sensitive. But there 
is causal relationship between salt intake and BP in most of population. On the other 
hand, there is no evidence that reducing salt intake causes harm.
In one of the meta-analyses including 17 randomized trials in hypertensives 
(n = 734) and 11 trials in normotensives (n = 2220) [47] it was shown that modest 
reduction in salt intake, from a usual intake of »10 to »5 g of salt per day over a more 
prolonged period of time resulted in the pooled estimates of blood pressure fall of 
4.96/2.73 ± 0.40/0.24 mmHg in hypertensives (P < 0.001 for both systolic and dia-
stolic) and 2.03/0.97 ± 0.27/0.21 mmHg in normotensives (P < 0.001 for both sys-
tolic and diastolic). Advice should be given to avoid salted products like bread and 
conserved products because there is high salt content. A daily intake of 5–6 g of salt 
is thus recommended in general population.
Other recommended lifestyle changes would include moderation in alcohol con-
sumption, eating Mediterranean diet, and smoking cessation.
J. Brguljan and G. Ambrosio685
Meta-analysis of 40 RCTs showed that calcium supplementation (approximately 
1 g/day) may significantly reduce systolic BP by 1.9 mm Hg and diastolic BP by 
1.0 mm Hg. The BP effect tended to be more pronounced in populations with a 
habitually low calcium intake (2.6/1.3 mm Hg). Blood pressure showed no further 
decrease when calcium doses exceeded 1 g/day [48].
Randomized controlled trials of magnesium supplementation in normotensive 
and hypertensive subjects were included in the meta-analysis of Jee et al. where 20 
trials were included 1220 participants, 85 weeks median duration and 15.4 mmol of 
daily doses of magnesium resulted in overall weighted net change in blood pressure 
systolic −0.6(−2.2; +1.0), diastolic −0.8(−2.1; +0.5) with the tests for heterogene-
ity: P < 0.001 [49].
It was demonstrated in TOHP Ii and Oslo Diet and Smoking intervention that 
rigorously applied lifestyle interventions can prevent, or at least delay, the onset of 
hypertension and cardiovascular events in at-risk subjects [50] Recomended life-
style changes are listed in Table 42.1.
Another interesting point for clinicians would be how to follow these high-nor -
mal people. In ESH/ESC guidelines they are considered as low-risk population 
unless more risk factors or symptomatic cardiovascular disease or chronic kidney 
disease more the stage 4 or diabetes with organ damage is present, when they are 
considered as very high-risk population. But nevertheless only lifestyle changes and 
no blood pressure intervention is recommended.
Considering recommendation how often to control blood pressure in these spe-
cific group of population and not to miss the moment when medical therapy should 
be considered, in Canadian guidelines it is recommended that if at the visit 1 OBPM 
Table 42.1 Adoption of lifestyle changes [9]
Recommendations ClassaLevelb,dLevelb,e
Salt restriction to 5–6 g per day is recommended. I A B
Moderation of alcohol consumption to no more than 20–30 g of 
ethanol per day in men and to no more than 10–20 g of ethanol per 
day in women is recommended.I A B
Increased consumption of vegetables, fruits, and low-fat dairy 
products is recommended.I A B
Reduction of weight to BMI of 25 kg/m2 and of waist circumference 
to <102 cm in men and <88 cm in women is recommended, unless 
contraindicated.I A B
Regular exercise, i.e. at least 30 min of moderate dynamic exercise  
on 5–7 days per week is recommended.I A B
It is recommended to give all smokers advice to quit smoking and  
to offer assistance.I A B
BMI body mass index
aClass of recommendation
bLevel of evidence
cReference(s) supporting levels of evidence
dBased on the effect on BP and/or CV risk profile
eBased on outcome studies42 Treatment of High-Normal Blood Pressure in the Guidelines686
is high-normal annual follow-up is recommended. In ESH/ESC guidelines there is 
no specific time recommendation, but high-normal blood pressure in the office is 
one of the clinical indications for out-of-office blood pressure measurements for 
diagnostic purposes.
 Conclusion
High-normal blood pressure individuals are at higher risk to develop hyperten-
sion and cardiovascular events. Considering the high prevalence of masked 
hypertension in this group, first masked hypertension should be excluded, prefer -
ably by ABMP.
Even though in the past guidelines from 2007 they were not recognized as a 
homogenous group, later in 2013 it was corrected that there is no additional 
value of pharmacological treatment in this group of population even thought hav-
ing concomitant diseases. Upon the later guidelines they shall undergo to the 
lifestyle modifications and regular follow-up of blood pressure measurements. 
Lifestyle changes should include losing excess weight, becoming physically 
active, limiting alcoholic beverages, and following a heart-healthy eating plan, 
including cutting back on salt and other forms of sodium. Smoking cessation is 
strongly recommended. If they have other risk factors they should be followed 
closely.
References
 1. Kearney PM, Whelton M, Reynolds K, Muntner P, Whelton PK, He J. Global burden of hyper -
tension: analysis of worldwide data. Lancet. 2005;365:217–23.
 2. Lim SS, V os T, Flaxman AD, Danaei G, et al. A comparative risk assessment of burden of dis-
ease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: 
a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 2012;380:2224–60.
 3. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, Peto R, Collins R, Prospective Studies Collaboration. 
Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of indi-
vidual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360(9349):1903–13.
 4. Whitworth JA, World Health Organization ISoHWG. 2003 World Health Organization 
(WHO)/International Society of Hypertension (ISH) statement on management of hyperten-
sion. J Hypertens. 2003;21(11):1983–92.
 5. Chobanian A V , Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL Jr, Jones DW, 
Materson BJ, Oparil S, Wright JT Jr, Roccella EJ, the National High Blood Pressure 
Education Program Coordinating Committee. Seventh report of the Joint National Committee 
on prevention, detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood pressure. Hypertension. 
2003;42(6):1206–52.
 6. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, Cushman WC, Dennison-Himmelfarb C, Handler J, Lackland 
D, LeFevre ML, MacKenzie TD, Ogedegbe O, Smith SC Jr, Svetkey LP, Taler SJ, Townsend 
RR, Wright JT Jr, Narva AS, Ortiz E. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management of 
high blood pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint 
Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014;311:507–20.
 7. Mainous AG III, Everett CJ, Liszka H, King DE, Egan BM. Prehypertension and mortality in 
a nationally representative cohort. Am J Cardiol. 2004;94:1496–500.
 8. Liszka HA, Mainous AG III, King DE, Everett CJ, Egan BM. Prehypertension and cardiovas-
cular morbidity. Ann Fam Med. 2005;3:294–9.
J. Brguljan and G. Ambrosio687
 9. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, Redón J, Zanchetti A, Böhm M, Christiaens T, Cifkova 
R, De Backer G, Dominiczak A, Galderisi M, Grobbee DE, Jaarsma T, Kirchhof P, Kjeldsen 
SE, Laurent S, Manolis AJ, Nilsson PM, Ruilope LM, Schmieder RE, Sirnes PA, Sleight P, 
Viigimaa M, Waeber B, Zannad F. 2013 ESH/ESC Guidelines for the management of arte-
rial hypertension: the task force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European 
Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart 
J. 2013;34:2159–219.
 10. Leung AA, Daskalopoulou SS, Dasgupta K, McBrien K, Butalia S, Zarnke KB, Nerenberg K, 
Harris KC, Nakhla M, Cloutier L, Gelfer M, Lamarre-Cliche M, Milot A, Bolli P, Tremblay 
G, McLean D, Tobe SW, Ruzicka M, Burns KD, Vallée M, Prasad GVR, Gryn SE, Feldman 
RD, Selby P, Pipe A, Schiffrin EL, McFarlane PA, Oh P, Hegele RA, Khara M, Wilson TW, 
Penner SB, Burgess E, Sivapalan P, Herman RJ, Bacon SL, Rabkin SW, Gilbert RE, Campbell 
TS, Grover S, Honos G, Lindsay P, Hill MD, Coutts SB, Gubitz G, Campbell NRC, Moe 
GW, Howlett JG, Boulanger JM, Prebtani A, Kline G, Leiter LA, Jones C, Côté AM, Woo 
V , Kaczorowski J, Trudeau L, Tsuyuki RT, Hiremath S, Drouin D, Lavoie KL, Hamet P, 
Grégoire JC, Lewanczuk R, Dresser GK, Sharma M, Reid D, Lear SA, Moullec G, Gupta M, 
Magee LA, Logan AG, Dionne J, Fournier A, Benoit G, Feber J, Poirier L, Padwal RS, Rabi 
DM. Hypertension Canada's 2017 Guidelines for diagnosis, risk assessment, prevention, and 
treatment of hypertension in adults. Can J Cardiol. 2017;33(5):557–76.
 11. Mancia G, De Backer G, Dominiczak A, Cifkova R, Fagard R, Germano G, Grassi G, 
Heagerty AM, Kjeldsen SE, Laurent S, Narkiewicz K, Ruilope L, Rynkiewicz A, Schmieder 
RE, Boudier HA, Zanchetti A, Vahanian A, Camm J, De Caterina R, Dean V , Dickstein K, 
Filippatos G, Funck-Brentano C, Hellemans I, Kristensen SD, McGregor K, Sechtem U, Silber 
S, Tendera M, Widimsky P, Zamorano JL, Erdine S, Kiowski W, Agabiti-Rosei E, Ambrosioni 
E, Lindholm LH, Viigimaa M, Adamopoulos S, Agabiti-Rosei E, Ambrosioni E, Bertomeu V , 
Clement D, Erdine S, Farsang C, Gaita D, Lip G, Mallion JM, Manolis AJ, Nilsson PM, O'Brien 
E, Ponikowski P, Redon J, Ruschitzka F, Tamargo J, van Zwieten P, Waeber B, Williams B, 
Management of Arterial Hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension, European 
Society of Cardiology. 2007 Guidelines for the Management of Arterial Hypertension: the task 
force for the Management of Arterial Hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension 
(ESH) and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). J Hypertens. 2007;25(6):1105–87.
 12. Lurbe E, Cifkova R, Cruickshank JK, Dillon MJ, Ferreira I, Invitti C, et al. Management of 
high blood pressure in children and adolescents: recommendations of the European Society of 
Hypertension. J Hypertens. 2009;27:1719–42.
 13. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, Cushman WC, Dennison-Himmelfarb C, Handler J, Lackland 
DT, LeFevre ML, MacKenzie TD, Ogedegbe O, Smith SC Jr, Svetkey LP, Taler SJ, Townsend 
RR, Wright JT Jr, Narva AS, Ortiz E. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management of 
high blood pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint 
National Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014;311(5):507–20.
 14. http://www.eshonline.org/annual-meeting-posts/to-treat-or-not-to-treat-what-to-do-for-high-
normal-bp/.
 15. Terry PD, Abramson JL, Neaton JD, MRFIT Research Group. Blood pressure and risk of death 
from external causes among men screened for the multiple risk factor intervention trial. Am J 
Epidemiol. 2007;165(3):294–301.
 16. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, Kannel WB, Levy D. Assessment of frequency of progression 
to hypertension in non-hypertensive participants in the Framingham Heart Study: a cohort 
study. Lancet. 2001;358(9294):1682–6.
 17. Zhang H, Thijs L, Kuznetsova T, Fagard RH, Li X, Staessen JAJ. Progression to hypertension 
in the non-hypertensive participants in the Flemish Study on environment, genes and health 
outcomes. Hypertension. 2006;24(9):1719–27.
 18. Julius S, Majahalme S, Nesbitt S, Grant E, Kaciroti N, Ombao H, Vriz O, Valentini MC, 
Amerena J, Gleiberman L. A “gender blind” relationship of lean body mass and blood pressure 
in the Tecumseh study. Am J Hypertens. 2002;15(3):258–63.42 Treatment of High-Normal Blood Pressure in the Guidelines688
 19. Xu T, Liu J, Zhu G, Liu J, Han S. Prevalence of prehypertension and associated risk factors 
among Chinese adults from a large-scale multi-ethnic population survey. BMC Public Health. 
2016;16(1):775.
 20. Pimenta E, Oparil S. Prehypertension: epidemiology, consequences and treatment. Nat Rev 
Nephrol. 2010;6(1):21–30.
 21. Julius S, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, et al., Trial of Preventing Hypertension (TROPHY) Study 
Investigators. Feasibility of treating prehypertension with an angiotensin-receptor blocker. N 
Engl J Med. 2006;354:1685–97.
 22. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Leip EP, Evans JC, O’Donnell CJ, Kannel WB, Levy D.  Impact 
of high-normal blood pressure on the risk of cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 
2001;345(18):1291–7.
 23. Hansen TW, Staessen JA, Zhang H, Torp-Pedersen C, Rasmussen S, Thijs L, Ibsen H, Jeppesen 
J.  Cardiovascular outcome in relation to progression to hypertension in the Copenhagen 
MONICA cohort. Am J Hypertens. 2007;20(5):483–91.
 24. Staessen JA, Li Y , Hara A, Asayama K, Dolan E, O’Brien E. Blood pressure measurement 
anno 2016. Am J Hypertens. 2017;30(5):453–63.
 25. Celis H, Fagard RH.  White-coat hypertension: a clinical review. Eur J Intern Med. 
2004;15(6):348–57.
 26. Brguljan-Hitij J, Thijs L, Li Y , Hansen TW, Boggia J, Liu YP, Asayama K, Wei FF, Bjorklund-
Bodegard K, Gu YM, Ohkubo T, Jeppesen J, Torp-Pedersen C, Dolan E, Kuznetsova T, 
Katarzyna SS, Tikhonoff V , Malyutina S, Casiglia E, Nikitin Y , Lind L, Sandoya E, Kawecka-
Jaszcz K, Filipovsky J, Imai Y , Wang J, O’Brien E, Staessen JA, on behalf of the International 
Database on Ambulatory blood pressure in relation to Cardiovascular Outcome Investigators. 
Risk stratification by ambulatory blood pressure monitoring across JNC classes of conven-
tional blood pressure. Am J Hypertens. 2014;27(7):956–65.
 27. Manios E, Michas F, Tsivgoulis G, Stamatelopoulos K, Tsagalis G, Koroboki E, Alexaki 
E, Papamichael C, Vemmos K, Zakopoulos N. Impact of prehypertension on carotid artery 
intima-media thickening: actual or masked? Atherosclerosis. 2011;214(1):215–9.
 28. Shimbo D, Newman JD, Schwartz JE. Masked hypertension and prehypertension: diagnostic 
overlap and interrelationships with left ventricular mass: the Masked Hypertension Study. Am 
J Hypertens. 2012;25(6):664–71.
 29. Lüders S, Schrader J, Berger J, et al. The PHARAO study: prevention of hypertension with 
the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor ramipril in patients with high-normal blood pres-
sure  – a prospective, randomized, controlled prevention trial of the German Hypertension 
League. J Hypertens. 2008;26:1487–96.
 30. Mancia G, De Backer G, Dominiczak A, et  al. Guidelines for the management of arterial 
hypertension: the task force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European 
Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart 
J. 2007;28:1462–536.
 31. Sever P, Dahlöf B, Poulter N, et al. Potential synergy between lipid-lowering and blood-pres-
sure-lowering in the Anglo-Scandinavian cardiac outcomes trial. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:2982–8.
 32. Schrier RW, Estacio RO, Esler A, Mehler P. Effects of aggressive blood pressure control in 
normotensive type 2 diabetic patients on albuminuria, retinopathy and strokes. Kidney Int. 
2002;61:1086–97.
 33. Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) Study Investigators. Effects of ramipril on 
cardiovascular and microvascular outcomes in people with diabetes mellitus: results of the 
HOPE study and MICROHOPE substudy. Lancet. 2000;355:253–9.
 34. ADV ANCE Collaborative Group. Effects of a fixed combination of perindopril and indap-
amide on macrovascular and microvascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(the ADV ANCE trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2007;370:829–40.
 35. PROGRESS Collaborative Study Group. Randomised trial of perindopril based blood pres-
sure-lowering regimen among 6108 individuals with previous stroke or transient ischaemic 
attack. Lancet. 2001;358:1033–41.
J. Brguljan and G. Ambrosio689
 36. Arima H, Chalmers J, Woodward M, Anderson C, Rodgers A, Davis S, MacMahon S, Neal B, 
for the PROGRESS Collaborative Group. Lower target blood pressures are safe and effective 
for the prevention of recurrent stroke: the PROGRESS trial. J Hypertens. 2006;24:1201–8.
 37. PATS Collaborating Group. Poststroke antihypertensive treatment study. A preliminary result. 
Chin Med J. 1995;108:710–7.
 38. Zanchetti A, Grassi G, Mancia G.  When should antihypertensive drug treatment be initi-
ated and to what levels should systolic blood pressure be lowered? A critical re-appraisal. J 
Hypertens. 2009;27:923–34.
 39. Aglony M, Acevedo M, Ambrosio G. Hypertension in adolescents. Expert Rev Cardiovasc 
Ther. 2009;7(12):1595–603.
 40. Neter JE, Stam BE, Kok FJ, Grobbee DE, Geleijnse JM. Influence of weight reduction on blood 
pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Hypertension. 2003;42:878–84.
 41. Horvath K, Jeitler K, Siering U, Stich AK, Skipka G, Gratzer TW, Siebenhofer A. Long-term 
effects of weight-reducing interventions in hypertensive patients: systematic review and meta-
analysis. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168(6):571–80.
 42. Siebenhofer A, Jeitler K, Berghold A, Waltering A, Hemkens LG, Semlitsch T, Pachler C, 
Strametz R, Horvath K. Long-term effects of weight-reducing diets in hypertensive patients. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011;9:CD008274.
 43. Cornelissen V A, Fagard RH. Effects of endurance training on blood pressure, blood pressure-
regulating mechanisms, and cardiovascular risk factors. Hypertension. 2005;46:667–75.
 44. Molmen-Hansen HE, Stolen T, Tjonna AE, Aamot IL, Ekeberg IS, Tyldum GA, et al. Aerobic 
interval training reduces blood pressure and improves myocardial function in hypertensive 
patients. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2012;19:151–60.
 45. Cornelissen V A, Fagard RH, Coeckelberghs E, Vanhees L. Impact of resistance training on 
blood pressure and other cardiovascular risk factors: a meta-analysis of randomized, controlled 
trials. Hypertension. 2011;58:950–8.
 46. Fagard RH.  Exercise therapy in hypertensive cardiovascular disease. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 
2011;53:404–11.
 47. He FJ, McGregor GA. Effect of modest salt reduction on blood pressure: a meta-analysis of 
randomized trials. Implications for public health. J Hum Hypertens. 2002;16:761–70.
 48. van Mierlo LA, Arends LR, Streppel MT, Zeegers MP, Kok FJ, Grobbee DE, Geleijnse 
JM. Blood pressure response to calcium supplementation: a meta-analysis of randomized con-
trolled trials. J Hum Hypertens. 2006;20(8):571–80.
 49. Jee SH, Miller ER 3rd, Guallar E, Singh VK, Appel LJ, Klag MJ. The effect of magnesium 
supplementation on blood pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Am J 
Hypertens. 2002;15(8):691–6. 
 50. Egan BM, Nesbitt SD, Julius S. Prehypertension: should we be treating with pharmacologic 
therapy? Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis. 2008;2(4):305–14.42 Treatment of High-Normal Blood Pressure in the Guidelines